<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:ab="http://example.org/audiobook-schema" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>The World is Round, Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="twir.css" />
  <link rel="icon" href="icon.svg" />
</head>
<body><nav><a href="twir_19.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_21.xhtml">Next »</a></nav><h2><div>Chapter Nineteen</div>Trapped by a Planet
  and a Friend</h2>

  <p>
    It was long after Mid-Patra, and, as usual, the Gostum were training. The
    Gostum were always training for something, although Paddelack never quite
    understood why or against whom, unless his own discipline theory was, in
    fact, the answer. But now that they had a Commander, they trained even more
    fervently. Paddelack himself, at this moment, had a sword in hand but found
    that he tired easily. There seemed so little air to breathe here during the
    Patra. That might explain why the Gostum were so amazingly strong, always
    training with so little air. Pike, though, seemed to be enjoying himself.
  </p>

  <p>
    There he was, his sword against Karrxlyn’s ax. Karrxlyn swung heavily, and
    Paddelack was sure that the blow would cleave Pike in two, but Pike neatly
    avoided it. Pike’s sword, however, was in the way and snapped under the
    crushing blow; the sharp twang of breaking metal resounded throughout the
    room. Karrxlyn leaped; Pike backed up. Suddenly, in mid-flight it seemed,
    Karrxlyn winced and stopped his charge. A small trickle of blood oozed from
    his shoulder as a gleaming metal object flashed by.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Don’t worry,</q> Pike laughed, but in a serious
    voice. <q ab:speaker="Pike">I didn’t poison it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    He left Karrxlyn standing in amazement in the middle of the floor, received
    his cape from an attendant, and walked over to Paddelack. <q ab:speaker="Pike">There’s something I’ve been meaning to talk to you
    about,</q> he said.
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack pulled his raven’s nose. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Tell me,
    what’s that?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">It has been suggested that you move into your own
    quarters.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack cocked his head. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Why? No, don’t tell
    me. They think we’re having an affair.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike didn’t laugh. <q ab:speaker="Pike">But, after all, I am Commander, am
    I not?</q> Scenes flashed quickly; the cold air creeping into the emergency
    chamber; fires; huddling. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Yes, I am Commander, am I
    not?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack glanced briefly at the ground, pulled on his nose again, and
    looked up once more into Pike’s eyes. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">I’ll tell
    you this, Pike,</q> he said in Bitter. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Fooling
    the Gostum into thinking you’re Polkraitz is fine with me and may have its
    uses. But be careful about fooling yourself.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">This is the Golun-Patra,</q> Pike answered with a sly
    smile, <q ab:speaker="Pike">and we have done some amazing things, wouldn’t
    you agree?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">I’ll agree that theorizing by coincidences will
    get you into a lot of trouble.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">When the coincidences become large in number, one
    begins to wonder, doesn’t one?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">One begins to become a fanatic,</q> Paddelack
    grumbled.
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike overheard this, glared at the thin man, and turned away. The storm of
    dust that was swept up by his cape blew into Paddelack’s eyes.
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    Paddelack moved out of Pike’s chamber very shortly, in fact,
    immediately. His new quarters were, by Liddlefuran standards, still quite
    regal, so he didn’t complain. He did, however, sneeze often, since for some
    reason the heating system was faulty in this section of Konndjlan and his
    room was cold. But at least he wasn’t awakened when a guard would enter to
    get Pike, so now he could sleep <q>late.</q> Whatever that meant.
  </p>

  <p>
    Finally the cold became too annoying, and Paddelack discovered that despite
    the maze of passageways needed to reach it, the workroom containing his
    newly built steam engine was, in fact, nearby. Using scraps of old
    Polkraitz equipment from the storerooms, he fashioned a crude radiator for
    his room; and after hacking a hole through several walls and floors—a
    process that took more than a beclad—he connected it to the steam
    engine. He ran back to his room to enjoy the heat but ended up enjoying
    only the clanking and rattling of the pipe works. After several more
    beclads of this noise he had had enough and shut the contraption off.
  </p>

  <p>
    Occasionally Paddelack’s thoughts would turn back to Daryephna and ahead to
    Triesk. The metallic hydrogen might be there; rockets were certainly
    there; the explanation of the Polkraitz was likely to be there. The major
    intersection at Triesk was clearly marked on the huge map. Pike’s reasoning
    had an annoying grain of consistency running through it that made
    refutation difficult, even though sometimes it seemed totally mad. But
    perhaps he was right and Triesk held the answers. The wait would be worth
    the cold and the sneezing.
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    While he waited, Paddelack continued working on the steam system for the
    Gostum. At first he wasn’t sure why he did it, since he was convinced that
    the result would be no better than what the Gostum had already and would
    not solve the ventilation problem, only alleviate it, and any modifications
    he could make in the Patra remaining would be minimal. When he showed the
    Gostum engineers how to use their steam engine as a pump, they became very
    excited, and the activity in the shops increased threefold.
  </p>

  <p>
    But Paddelack came to know that his activity was merely a desperate attempt
    to keep his mind off the clocks, the clocks that showed that the Patra was
    rapidly drawing to a close. But the attempt did not work. Every time he
    neared the great hall, he could feel his pulse beat faster and faster as he
    stole a glance at the two timepieces. Now they differed by a full
    beclad. Paddelack could only gnaw at his lip because there was absolutely
    no way to tell which was correct. An extra beclad to wait if the slower one
    was telling the truth. Could he stand it? No. This time as Paddelack neared
    the council chamber, the clock was unbearable to him, each clack resounding
    through the halls. This time he could not stand to <em>see</em> how much
    longer he might have to wait. He turned and ran away from the sounds of the
    swinging pendulum and foliot bars, down the corridors to the stables.
  </p>

  <p>
    He pulled the lever that lowered the floor. Far off, the steam from a
    buried mechanism whistled and the platform slowly sank. In front of
    Paddelack was the first of the three great wooden doors that separated him
    from the outside world. He grimaced and slammed the bolts aside and heaved
    the door open, hurling it against the tunnel wall. The crash reverberated
    for endless seconds. Then he passed to the second door, shivering, breath
    condensing out of the air. He regarded the iron strapping for a moment, set
    his jaw, and unbolted that one, too.
  </p>

  <p>
    <em>Creak!</em> screamed the door as he pulled it open.
  </p>

  <p>
    The subfreezing air hit his body. Paddelack brushed the tears away and ran
    to the thickest, final door, the only one keeping him from the
    Patra. Shaking, almost numb, he pounded away at the heavy wood, reinforced
    with ancient metal.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Curse you!</q> he cried again and again.
  </p>

  <p>
    Now he crumpled to his knees and his body shook with convulsive sobs. After
    a few moments he slowly stood up, walked past the second door, and shut it
    behind him with its great creak shouting in protest. He passed the inner
    door and pulled it close with a deep thud. He swiveled around, hit it once
    with his fist, and returned to the stables.
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    How did the Gostum do it? Paddelack asked himself for the hundredth
    time. At least on Massarat, the incredible easiness about everything,
    variable families included, went a long way to explain the ability to cope
    with the Patra. But the Gostum, although biologically identical, didn’t use
    that system. Paddelack wished he could change his body rhythm at will to a
    Patra-Bannk per cycle, but he knew he couldn’t. He could do nothing but
    pound and wait. As the depression gave way to embarrassment, Paddelack
    paced absently toward the great hall.
  </p>

  <p>
    The council was in session. Effrulyn and his fixed Angles were there. So
    was Fara-Ny, whose myriad wrinkles well disguised his intentions. Karrxlyn,
    the warrior, never strayed far from Pike, and so all were gathered and
    already talking when Paddelack walked in late, having paced there by
    coincidence. He had not known the time.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Now,</q> Pike was in the process of saying, <q ab:speaker="Pike">I plan on using the stala to do some investigating of my
    own and see if anything can be discovered. I have promised to help you, and
    the stala will make things easier in that regard.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Fara-Ny">But the Fear, Commander. Only certain Elsewheres
    are open to us because the Fear is absent.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Yes, I know. I will be careful.</q> Pike could not
    help but remember that moment in Daryephna. The encounter had been brief,
    but something had stuck in his head. A single word or Command waiting to be
    crystallized. It meant nothing now, but it would. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Now,</q> he continued, <q ab:speaker="Pike">your sources
    indicate that Triesk is a large city, something over ten thousand. Which
    means we will need help from others…Ah, Paddelack. Sit down. Tell us, do
    you think the Liddlefurans will come to our aid?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack blinked and brushed away the dirt from his hand. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Aid? For what?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">In case we should need them against Triesk.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Why should we?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Reconnaissance shows that Triesk has many more
    inhabitants than Konndjlan. Therefore we will need reinforcements. Perhaps
    even more than Massarat can provide.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack pulled his nose and squinted his eyes. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Hold on here. Why do we need reinforcements at
    all?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">If we have to mount a siege, it will not be easy.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Siege! Sarek, who said anything about a siege?
    You said we would go up there and take a look and see what was there and
    help these Gostum find what they wanted. A siege?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Calm down, Paddy, my friend. The Gostum have already
    asked the Trieskans for help but can’t even get negotiations started. We
    must issue a final ultimatum, but, of course, we must be prepared for the
    eventuality that it will be refused. No decision has yet been made—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">My eye, no decision had yet been made! I knew
    something like this was going to happen. Do you see what you’ve gotten
    into?</q> Paddelack was already on his feet. He took a last look at the
    ventilated torches whose soot, left from the Bannk, smudged the relief
    above them, took a last look at the two clocks on the dais, one short and
    squat, the other tall and slender, both noisy, then turned around and began
    walking toward the archway.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Remember, we have promised to help the Gostum. We must
    be good to our word. Everyone must be taken away from Patra-Bannk. To stay
    on a world like this is perpetual madness. Don’t you see what we are trying
    to do? We are simply trying to help, and they need my leadership. Isn’t
    that clear even to you?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack was, by this time, almost out of the room. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">No! I won’t have anything to do with it. Be
    Commander for all I care. I’m going back to Massarat.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Fara-Ny coughed, and Karrxlyn leaped in front on Paddelack with sword
    drawn.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">No,</q> Pike called, and he laughed. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Let him go. He’ll be back. After all, he’s a suicide
    case, anyway.</q> Then he spoke to Paddelack directly. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Just inform Massarat of our desire to be honored by their
    assistance.</q>
  </p>

  <nav><a href="twir_19.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_21.xhtml">Next »</a></nav></body></html>