<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:ab="http://example.org/audiobook-schema" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>The World is Round, Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="twir.css" />
  <link rel="icon" href="icon.svg" />
</head>
<body><nav><a href="twir_37.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown-top" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown-top&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_39.xhtml">Next »</a></nav><h2><div>Chapter Thirty-Seven</div>Final
  Convergence, or the New Cosmology</h2>

  <p>
    Barbalan sat on the floor plaiting her long black hair. She was watching
    Stringer, who sat on the edge of the couch which had served as their bed
    for so long. With a cocked head she listened to him strum his rodoft. He
    had been playing softly, mindlessly, for the last telclad or more. Now his
    fingers slowed to a halt; he put down the bow and laid the instrument
    aside. Without saying a word, he stood up and walked over to his old sack,
    which sat heaped in the corner, untouched for teclads. From it he removed
    his sun suit, pulled it over his naked body, then found the cowl and
    adjusted that on his head, pushing the three long cloths behind his
    neck. His empty water and salt flasks he hung at his side, their leather
    thongs crossing his chest. He picked up his kalan, ran his finger over the
    once razor-sharp edge, and strapped that around his waist, too. Finally, he
    slung the holster for his pistols across his shoulder and was fully armed.
  </p>

  <p>
    Barbalan screwed up her eyes. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">What are you doing,
    Stringer?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Leaving. Back to Ta-tjenen.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The nod of Barbalan’s head was one of long expectation. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">You miss Taljen and want to see her again. I
    know. Stringer, I have always understood that I have been but a replacement
    for her until you were finished with what you had to do.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">No!</q> Stringer said, turning about. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">No, don’t think that. Taljen is past, you are
    present. The past is gone, lost; you are here.</q> Stringer grabbed
    Barbalan’s long hair and pulled her to her feet. He attempted to kiss her,
    but she pulled away.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Then why are you going?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer lowered his eyes. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Neberdjer and I spoke
    together earlier. <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">Stringer,</q> it said, <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">the problem is solved, the planet is safe.</q> When
    I asked how, there was a long silence. Have you ever heard a long silence
    from Neberdjer? I didn’t think that was possible. And it told me, <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">I have the ability to grow.</q> That was all it
    said, nothing else. Finally, after I pressed and pressed, it said, <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">I could now tell you which particular
    <q>circuit</q>—for lack of a better term—was faulty, because, more than
    yourselves, I have the capability of self-analysis. But it would be
    meaningless to you, as if someone tried to tell you which brain cell a
    thought occurred in.</q> Neberdjer went on. I remembers the words very
    clearly. <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">When I once explained to you how a
    pendulum worked and you suddenly understood, could you explain to me which
    part of you understood? All of you understood. In the same way, after
    talking to you last time, I understood the problem to be internal. Once
    that fact was admitted, the path to be taken was clear, if risky. I mutated
    myself. More correction devices were built, new circuits added, old one
    taken out. It was a somewhat random process because the exact location of
    the faulty brain cell was blocked from me by the fault itself. But after
    enough new organs were generated, the new synthesis produced a successful
    being. I have mutated myself to a new Neberdjer. I am not the same one you
    knew.</q></q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer paused and continued to gaze at the floor. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Then I understood that I have been as blind as
    Neberdjer. It ignored data that was right in front of its eyes. There was
    nothing else wrong. There was no problem that we, from the outside, could
    correct. And I’ve done the same thing all along. All the evidence for the
    artificiality of the planet was there. How long did I take to put it
    together? At the Festival, when I first saw the Gostum and didn’t report it
    to Taljen: all the evidence was displayed as if on a screen and I ignored
    it. I ignored teclads of data that told me that Taljen only saw me as a
    companion for a Patra-Bannk, and I still fell in love with her. And worst
    of all, on the way south, I ignored all the indications…Ta-tjenen is being
    attacked, isn’t it?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Yes.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Why didn’t you tell me?</q> Stringer’s voice rose
    to the ceiling. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">No, it isn’t something that should
    have to be told. I’m sorry.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">I did think it obvious to you. But I also knew
    this and so did not speak: Triesk is a city; we were to save a
    world. Perhaps, as it has turned out, we were not good world savers, but
    was there even a choice?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I even helped the spy…</q> Stringer went on
    unhearing. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">This could all be my fault. What kind
    of a person does this?</q> he asked himself softly. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Neberdjer and I are more than blood brothers, are we
    not?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Barbalan only grinned.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Now it is time to go.</q> Stringer started to
    march out of the room and ran straight into Valyavar, who was striding in
    the opposite direction.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">You’d seem for a fight. Where are you going?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Ta-tjenen.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">To me it seems you weren’t on the best of terms
    when you left. Wise, is it, to go back?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">They’re under attack by our friend Pike, if he
    hasn’t finished them off already.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Valyavar cocked an eye. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">To be sure?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">To be sure.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Still, should you go?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Don’t you see? They are on the verge of
    extinction. The Bannk before last destroyed most of their fuel supply. Even
    if they survive the attack, will they have enough time to prepare for the
    Patra? It may be too late now—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">You still have not answered, little Stringer. They
    hate you at Ta-tjenen, most certainly even more now. Is it wise to go
    back?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer whirled about, glaring. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What does their
    hating me have to do with it? They need my help. There is no fondness in me
    for Ta-tjenen but, as you once said, we are all citizens of
    Patra-Bannk.</q> Stringer pushed Valyavar out of the way but Barbalan
    jumped up and caught him before he left the room.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">The terminal at Triesk is certainly to be guarded
    now. Could you fight your way through alone?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Could we even do it together?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Once, at Pant, we pretended you were my
    prisoner. There, the ruse didn’t work. Perhaps this time it will.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">It’s no trick that I’m your prisoner. Are you
    coming, Val?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">’Ts been a long time since the battle for the
    Transhi. Would I miss this?</q>
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    The trip north was as quiet as free fall. Stringer checked and rechecked
    the grasers. Every other moment he would reach down to his side and feel
    for his kalan. Valyavar sat back stroking his beard and flexing his
    arms. Stringer could see the glow rising beneath the coal-black
    eyes. Barbalan leaned forward fingering the Fairtalian pendant which, if
    anything, would see them through. An occasional attempt at conversation
    dwindled into silence after a few short moments, and the long quiet would
    continue.
  </p>

  <p>
    At the slight thud that always concluded the fall, when the latches took
    hold, Stringer jumped up, muscles tense.
  </p>

  <p>
    Barbalan hugged him. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">This is not a time to be
    nervous, Stringer. You are a great fighter with the kalan, so Valyavar
    tells me and so I have seen. Do you fight well when nervous? Or when
    relaxed? Your mind must be as sharp as your kalan but at its ease. Your
    body must be as tense as a coiled spring but without tension.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You’re right.</q> Stringer hid his graser and
    released his kalan to Barbalan. The door opened, and the circular map that
    stood in the center of the room came into view. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">It’s a large terminal,</q> he whispered, seeing
    dozens of other exits. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">It must connect half of
    Patra-Bannk.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">New recruits,</q> Barbalan said, walking by the
    first guards she saw.
  </p>

  <p>
    The guard already had her hand on her sword. <q ab:speaker="Gostum guard     woman">Why are they not blindfolded?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    A stupid oversight! Barbalan tossed Stringer his kalan. He caught it and
    lunged at the Gostum, piercing her through the stomach. Barbalan delivered
    a slice across another’s neck almost simultaneously, and that guard didn’t
    even have a chance to cry.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer swiveled around to see a third guard diving through the air at
    Valyavar. Stunned, Stringer watched the giant catch the guard in midair and
    in one continuous motion bring the man down across his knee. Stringer heard
    a loud crack as the victim’s back broke, and was glad that he had never
    fought with Valyavar. Only then did Valyavar pull out his graser and begin
    stalking the terminal exit.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">No,</q> Barbalan said, <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">let me go first. If there are only a few, I’ll kill
    them myself before they know what is going on. If there are more than a
    few, we have little hope, anyway.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I’m not sure about that,</q> Stringer said,
    cringing under Valyavar’s eye, the same eyes he had seen when they had
    first met, many years ago.
  </p>

  <p>
    Barbalan opened the door, and Stringer followed her and Valyavar out into
    the sun of the Weird Bannk. He looked around and saw the surrounding hills
    covered with tents.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">New recruits,</q> Barbalan was explaining to the
    guards. This time the ploy worked. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">This way. Come
    on, now! A Weird Bannk it is, but the sun is nonetheless to be gotten out
    of.</q> The three climbed up a hillside on which Gostum soldiers and their
    allies swarmed about like ants. The smell was horrifying.
  </p>

  <p>
    They halted at the summit of a farther hill to see a Ta-tjenen under
    siege. Hundreds, perhaps thousands, of tents surrounded the citadel,
    concentrated to the southwest, near the remains of the burned-out
    forest. Stringer saw three shuttles off to his right, nestled within the
    confines of a large group of buildings. A flag of orange and black flew
    above it. To the east, several kilometers distant: the coast and small
    ships. Smoke rose from the water’s edge and more tents could be seen
    there. Another front? Who could be battling from the sea?
  </p>

  <p>
    Soon they had scurried down the hill and were walking among the Gostum
    camped at the base of the acropolis. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">You haven’t
    taken the city?</q> Barbalan asked the first soldier they met.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Gostum soldier">You have been away, I take it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Yes, exactly.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Gostum soldier">Do you see?</q> the man asked, pointing to
    the top of the city. <q ab:speaker="Gostum soldier">That can only signify
    one thing.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Barbalan looked up to see a black column of smoke rising from an unseen
    fire and dissipating in the wind. Just then a cartload of corpses was
    dumped over the city wall, and as the bodies tumbled down the slopes,
    Gostum soldiers scattered in all directions.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Gostum soldier">After we cut through the magic fence and the
    sun finally blessed us by moving enough so we were not blinded, there was
    still that. Do we want to enter and die ourselves? There is a great
    discussion, and the answer should be coming shortly from the
    Commander.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Ta-tjenen is desperate now,</q> Stringer said. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">If you two are afraid, you can stay here. I’m
    going.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Barbalan nodded her approval and pressed Stringer’s hand. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">But, Stringer, there is still one problem: how do we
    get in?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer’s eyes lit up. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">The Gostum seem to have
    forgotten that most of Ta-tjenen is underground. There is a passage that
    exits not far from here. I used it to take <em>Nothing</em> out for its
    first flight. But first, you’d better find some other clothes. A Gostum in
    Ta-tjenen is not treated lightly.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Barbalan disappeared for a moment and returned in a plain sun suit.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Okay, this way.</q> Stringer circled around to the
    northeast. Only a few Gostum were there, and most of them seemed to be
    running off to the coast. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">It’s around here
    somewhere, hidden,</q> Stringer said as he climbed the rocks that lined the
    base of the hill.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Watch it, Stringer!</q> came Valyavar’s warning,
    but it was too late. An arrow from above had already pierced Stringer’s
    arm.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">It’s all right,</q> Stringer replied as he pressed
    himself against the hill. He yanked the arrow from his flesh, and Barbalan
    bound the wound with a bandage cut from her cowl.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Let’s hope that arm needn’t be used soon,</q> she
    said.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer chuckled. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Let’s hope. There’s the door,
    over there, between those two rocks. See?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Valyavar scrambled over and began to hurl aside the thick camouflage of
    branches and stone.
  </p>

  <p>
    Now Gostum soldiers began to gather below them, attracted by the commotion.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Shoot them—</q> Stringer’s command was too
    late. Valyavar had lifted a rock and hurled it down the hill. It bounced
    once and crashed into two Gostum. Barbalan shot another with Stringer’s
    pistol.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">There’s no time to waste now. In we go,</q>
    Valyavar cried as he crashed open the door. Stringer and Barbalan scrambled
    in, and together the three of them wedged the door shut with pieces of the
    Junk and Stringer’s old workbench.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Follow me.</q> Stringer led the way into the
    inhabited parts of the Under. The dead and near dead were lying about in
    the communal rooms and in the passageways. The stench of decaying bodies
    was everywhere, as well as the bitter smells of urine and feces.
  </p>

  <p>
    Outside the Gateway it was not much better. Debris from the terminator
    winds still littered the plaza. Ta-tjenen had not even begun repairs this
    Bannk. Fires heaped with the bodies of the dead were burning
    everywhere. Stringer covered his mouth and coughed.
  </p>

  <p>
    A Tjenen with swollen cheeks walked close by them, stared with sunken eyes,
    and collapsed at their feet.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">What else could they expect?</q> Valyavar
    asked. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">In a place like this? Sun, close quarters,
    food supplies low. How did Ta-tjenen expect to withstand such a siege? Did
    they walk away from their minds? Now they may realize that generals have
    little to do with the outcome of wars. They but mop up after nature.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer saw a group of men pulling a catapult toward the city walls. They
    were still fighting. It was, indeed communal suicide.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Stringer, now what do you expect to do?</q>
    Barbalan asked.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer grimaced. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Come on.</q> He set off for the
    edge of the city. He saw the shadow of the gnomon quivering on the sundial,
    faint in the smoke of the dead and haze of the air. The Bannk was not even
    half done.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="angry Tjenen">So Polkraitz!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer spun around.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="angry Tjenen">You have come to finish off your work!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The face was unfamiliar to Stringer. It could have been one of those who,
    in earlier times, had listened to his rodoft, never sure whether the Alien
    was a simple murderer or a Polkraitz intent on destroying them all. Now, of
    course, the answer was clear.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="angry Tjenen">You came at the Golun and heralded the doom of
    Ta-tjenen. Now you come back to gloat over your work!</q> The man lunged at
    him but Stringer just stepped aside and the stranger fell. He stirred
    faintly on the ground.
  </p>

  <p>
    Valyavar bent to the body on the ground and gave him some water from his
    flask and some synthetic bread from Neberdjer. The man choked, managed to
    sit up for a few brief moments, then collapsed. Valyavar shook his head. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">There seems to be no god of healing in this story,
    little Stringer. Do you understand me?</q> Stringer nodded and the three
    continued.
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane’s yard was even more cluttered than Stringer had remembered it, not
    only with new instruments but with people milling about as well. Stringer
    pushed his way through the crowd and no one tried to stop him. He held his
    breath as he entered the house, door open as always. More papers than ever
    littered the floor; old manuscripts lay open, covering almost all the bare
    wood. Stringer scanned the first room, finding faces that were only vaguely
    familiar. Why were they here? The situation was no different in the second
    or third workroom. All the clocks were still running; as always, all
    indicated different times. For the first time since he had reentered
    Ta-tjenen, Stringer managed to smile.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer did not notice the figure that stepped out from behind the second
    doorway. The knife streaked toward his neck but clattered to the floor as
    Valyavar’s iron grip caught the hand that held it. Taljen gasped in pain.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">I thought she was a friend of yours, Stringer.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer gaped at Taljen in silence. Her hair was thin and her face too
    pale for a Weird Bannk; but she was still Taljen, the same woman whom he
    had left almost a Patra-Bannk earlier, whose beauty struggled to remain
    undiminished. Stringer extended his wounded arm toward her dirty cheek and
    with his hand brushed back her hair. He studied her eyes for a long
    moment, pupils flitting back and forth. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Let her
    go, Val,</q> he said, turning away, <q ab:speaker="Stringer">let her go.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    In the fourth room he found Alhane sitting at his desk. A young
    blond-haired man was sitting next to him. Stringer had seen that one
    before—at Konndjlan. A Gostum here, in a Ta-tjenen under siege?
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane and the blond-haired man had been silently looking at each other all
    this time and only gradually became aware that someone else was in the same
    room. Finally Alhane saw Stringer from the corner of his eye. There was a
    slight hesitation of disbelief, and then he jumped up and hugged the
    intruder. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Stringer! We have just made a great
    discovery! No, Effrulyn has just made a great discovery—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">I could not have done it without your
    experiments,</q> the young man replied, scowling. <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">The credit is equally yours—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Oh, I thank you, but it doesn’t matter. What matters
    is that we have found it. You were right, Stringer! Your gravity was right!
    We have discovered a great thing about the world!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">We have discovered that we know nothing,</q>
    Effrulyn added.
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane sighed. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I concede there are difficulties. At
    the moment, we have only the relative distances between the sun,
    Patra-Bannk, and the Runaway. At the moment, Effrulyn’s constant is
    undetermined. We need it to find those distances and also to verify your
    claim about the density of Patra-Bannk. The sun could be a million
    kilometers away—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">I say a thousand.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">We haven’t the faintest idea. Patra-Bannk could be
    as dense as a brass weight—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">I say a feather.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">We don’t know. We must determine that constant. An
    independent experiment is needed.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Effrulyn scowled, as usual. <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">All we’ve discovered
    as a result of your investigations are unsolvable problems.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Unsolvable problems from my investigations! Good!
    And what has your theorem brought upon us, I ask you—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">Beauty, elegance, and above all, symmetry—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">You are ignoring the real implications, I tell
    you. If the Universe is finite in extent, it must collapsed by its own
    gravity, as Stringer once told me is now happening, even though I can’t see
    it. But if the Universe should be infinite in extent—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">How?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">If the world is round, the Universe can be
    infinite. And if it is, with infinite forces pulling in all directions, all
    the gravity cancels out and the Universe can’t collapse, except in local
    clusters, which may have been what Stringer meant.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">You assume all infinities are equal! A child’s
    assumption!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Then the Universe can be infinite and still
    collapse. Is that to be the way of the world?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">If the Universe is infinite, your foolish eyes
    would be burned out by a sunlit sky during the Patra. Explain that!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Humph. And we still haven’t explained how the
    Universe ever expanded in order for it to begin collapsing, so Stringer
    must be wrong—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">Metaphysics! That’s all I hear these beclads,
    metaphysics! And you claimed you studied reality! Is there any wonder I’m a
    mathematician? Next we’ll be dancing on the head of a pin!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Valyavar leaned over to Stringer and whispered in his ear, <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Did they expect the road to God to be an easy
    one?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer broke out into laughter but found that his eyes were tearing. He
    put his hands on the two combatants’ shoulders and smiled. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I could tell you something about that, Alhane, Keeper
    of the Great Clock, for I too have discovered a few things about this
    world. But I am afraid that it would take me three hundred years to explain
    it to you, my old friend.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">A year? You must tell me what a year is.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">A year? A year!</q> Stringer jerked his head erect
    as if he had been shot in the back. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You will find
    out soon enough!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane shook his head. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I am afraid that Ta-tjenen
    will find out nothing soon enough. Although I used every defense I could
    think of and Glintz came to our aid, we have lost. If the Gostum decide to
    attack again, we are finished—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Effrulyn jumped to his feet. <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">I just remembered. I
    did originally come to ask you if you would like to surrender.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane waved him down. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Even if we do surrender, a
    thing I could never convince the nestrexam to do, it will make no
    difference. The Bannk will engender the disease, and if we are not dead by
    sunset, we will be shortly afterward. The Patra will bury us. We have no
    more fuel and will have to go too far to get it. Ta-tjenen is ended on
    three sides, my young colleague.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">No!</q> Stringer shouted. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">There will be no more Patras or Bannks. I think I
    have the solution.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">What? Are you not telling us falsely?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I can’t explain; it would take three hundred
    years. Alhane, can you build me a megaphone, something to project my voice
    to the Gostum faction?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Yes, I believe we could do that.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Then hurry up.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane rushed out and Effrulyn glanced up at Stringer. <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">I am afraid I have tarried here too many beclads. By
    now the Gostum will think me traitor or dead—such trivialities! In either
    case, they will certainly attack for revenge. It is an excuse as good as
    all the others they have been using.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Hold on. I suspect that that you are most useful
    here.</q> Stringer then left the room.
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane, with his customary resourcefulness, had put something together in
    less than a telclad, and at Stringer’s direction a huge megaphone was
    loaded onto a cart and taken to the south edge of the city.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer climbed on top of the cart and prepared to speak to the Gostum
    thirty or forty meters below.
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike had long ago removed his cape and was walking through the
    camp with Fara-Ny and Karrxlyn. Pike had decided that Effrulyn was
    dead and now was the time for the final attack. Triesk would fall
    as a straw man blown over in the wind. He mounted his grask and
    rode through the camp. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Men, while you have
    been waiting, we have made the decision. One final push and Triesk will be
    ours. There is no turning back now! We are almost through and soon the
    rockets will be ours!</q> The troops slowly armed themselves and more
    slowly formed ranks. Pike realized there was dissension in their hearts. <q ab:speaker="Pike">I will lead the attack myself. We will take one of my
    ships and land in the middle of Triesk. I will risk being captured for you,
    and you will follow.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    At this the troops cheered. The sound was pleasant to Pike’s ears. They
    would indeed follow him anywhere. He was Commander. Bows were snatched up
    and catapults armed.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Back to the ship, Karrxlyn. Get three dozen of your
    best. This will soon be over.</q> Pike rode off. He did not notice the
    small figure perched on the city walls above his head, or if he did, he
    never guessed that it was his former companion. But he halted when he heard
    the voice carried down by the wind.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Gostum below! Listen to me! I am Polkraitz, like
    your Commander. Those who remember that there was more than one Alien will
    believe me.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike glared up. Stringer alive! At Triesk! How? He must have found out—Pike
    smiled to himself. A worthy opponent at last.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You will find nothing in Triesk. No rockets to
    take you from Patra-Bannk. They do not exist. I, one of the Polkraitz, tell
    you this.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Do not listen to the traitor!</q> Pike yelled. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Shoot him down! Prepare for the attack!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer looked down from the high walls and saw continuous motion. Arrows
    shot from crossbows began to fly upward.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I don’t think they are listening,</q> Alhane
    said. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">It’s no use.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer raised the megaphone once more. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Those who
    join the attack will see the results within half a beclad! The sun will
    fall! I, one of the Polkraitz, tell you this.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The preparations below slowed for a moment, but soon the barrage began anew
    as Pike urged them on. <q ab:speaker="Pike">The last attack! I promise you
    this as your Commander and as one of the Returned myself.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The first catapult was fired and the city wall next to Stringer rocked. He
    sighed. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Barbalan, Valyavar, we have to get back to
    Neberdjer.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Barbalan gazed out over the fields. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">It will be
    impossible now, Stringer. Pike is certainly wanting your death.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Then he’ll get me. Effrulyn, I have seen you with
    Pike before. He knows you.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">Yes,</q> the mathematician answered. <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">I was his chief advisor. He no doubt thinks me
    deceased.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Good, then he’ll be pleasantly surprised to see
    you again, especially with us as your prisoners. Let’s go before he gets
    here. I know a way out.</q> Stringer had his hands bound together as well
    as those of Barbalan and Valyavar. They left via the way they had come, and
    Effrulyn marched them unhindered straight into the Gostum command
    headquarters.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">A present for you, Commander,</q> Effrulyn shouted
    to Pike just as he was stepping into the shuttle. <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">They surrendered rather than die with Triesk.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike halted. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Effrulyn, you are alive! Good.</q> Then
    he looked at Stringer as if he had never known him. <q ab:speaker="Pike">So, you also are still alive, it seems. That skinny body
    of yours has proved to be more troublesome than one would have
    expected. But I have no time to waste with you now and will decide your
    fate later.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Wait!</q> Stringer shouted. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You will find nothing in Triesk. You have my
    word. Just some old shuttles. Don’t you realize that the only thing here is
    that terminal, which you have already found?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">The Polkraitz will be avenged. The cause is just.</q>
    Pike took one more step into the shuttle.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer thought quickly. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Wait!</q> he shouted
    again, holding out his weak right arm. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I know
    where the metallic hydrogen factory is. I will show it to you if you do not
    attack Triesk.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike hesitated at the shuttle threshold. <q ab:speaker="Pike">You have
    discovered the hydrogen factory?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer worked on that hesitation. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Yes, and it’s
    yours if you want it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Karrxlyn also noticed the hesitation. <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">But,
    Commander, what about Triesk?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Shut up!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">Be careful of your speech, Commander,</q> Karrxlyn
    said, hand on sword.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">You will obey me! Don’t you see there is nothing in
    Triesk? Stringer will tell you. Don’t you see that all this has been a
    game? Do you really think I fell for your Polkraitz business? Yes, you will
    have your Triesk; I promised you that. But you will wait until my business
    is done. I tell you this as the Returned and as your Commander. Do you
    understand that?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Since Karrxlyn understood that Pike was contradicting himself at every
    turn, he nodded, grip still tight on the hilt of his sword.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Now you will wait for me.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">All right, Commander, I will wait.</q> Karrxlyn
    released his sword and relaxed, deciding that any action would be better
    postponed.
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike turned back to Stringer. <q ab:speaker="Pike">How do I know you are
    telling the truth?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You have all of Triesk as hostage. Will you come
    with me?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike looked at Karrxlyn and the age Fara-Ny. Their eyes were at once stern
    and hopeless. <q ab:speaker="Pike">If I am not back within half a beclad,
    attack without me. Now, Stringer, where do we go?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">The terminal.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The bodies were still heaped inside northern Patra-Bannk’s main station
    when the entourage arrived. Pike entered behind the others and then glanced
    in turn at Valyavar, Barbalan, and Effrulyn. <q ab:speaker="Pike">No. We go
    alone.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Don’t you trust me?</q> Stringer asked.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">That’s not the question. Do you want to see your
    friends alive again is the question. Now, show me where we are going on the
    map.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer stepped to the inside of the huge cylindrical map and pointed. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Neberdjer, it’s called. There on the equator. The
    central controls to this planet—and to your hydrogen supply.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Neberdjer!</q> Pike exclaimed. <q ab:speaker="Pike">I
    have been there and talked to it. It is really in charge of this
    planet?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Yes.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike’s expression of surprise instantly transformed itself into one of
    rage. <q ab:speaker="Pike">That beast tried to kill me! But it will learn
    what trying to kill one of the Polkraitz means! If it doesn’t show me the
    hydrogen supply this time, I will blow that whole city sky-high!</q> Pike
    slammed his fist on the Neberdjer bar and the car door opened. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Yes, Stringer, I have found out a few things about this
    planet. It is time Neberdjer came to its reckoning.</q> Pike backed out
    under the map, into the car, fending Stringer off with a graser. <q ab:speaker="Pike">And you, Stringer, have crossed me for the last
    time. Guards, take them!</q> Pike disappeared.
  </p>

  <p>
    Effrulyn held out his hands at the advancing Gostum. <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">You will not move. Let them be.</q> Then he said to
    Stringer, <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">Pike is mad. None of the actions make
    any sense whatsoever. He has forgotten what he was and what he came for. In
    his attempt to write his own epitaph across the stars, he has come to
    grasping at straws.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I see that,</q> Stringer replied. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What do we do now?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">We can’t let him get to Neberdjer!</q> Barbalan
    cried. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Who knows what he will do to it?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    At that instant, Stringer’s memory flooded open. The early
    warnings not to argue with him, Barbalan falling strangled at
    Konndjlan, the cell door slamming shut, the refugees from Massarat
    slammingshut shut
    Taljen​slamming​shut​terminal​at​Pant​slamming​shut​Pike’s​fists​slamming​shut​council​chamber​siege​on​Triesk​slamming—. Stringer
    shivered. From the top to the bottom of his body he shivered and
    his hand was clenched so tightly into a fist that blood trickled
    from where the nails had cut through. Yes, he realized then, in
    that flooding moment, Pike and he had more than a few things in
    common. He knew well what Pike would do.
  </p>

  <p>
    A glance at the map showed a small light, indicating that Pike was on his
    way. It was barely moving now, not enough even to be visible on that map,
    but Stringer knew that the speed would rapidly increase…
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">…and we can’t fall any faster than he can.</q> His
    voice was tense and quivering. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Wait! There must be
    a port under here. We’ll take a ship.</q> Stringer quickly scanned the
    directory. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Over here! Come on!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    He raced through one of the many doors with Valyavar and Barbalan close
    behind him. In a few moments he was running up a gangplank. He had used a
    ship like this once before on their journeys to the ends of
    Patra-Bannk. The controls were clear to him, the language familiar, taught
    to him by Neberdjer over the teclads. The ship sprang to life under his
    fingers. The engines fired and the Netherworld craft slipped off the
    ramp. Stringer steered for the tunnel. But many dozens of tunnels emerged
    from the terminal above his head, radiating like spokes of a wheel and
    traveling to parts of Patra-Bannk hundreds of thousands of kilometers
    away. Which one of those tunnels disappearing into the gloom? Which one?
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer yelled at the ship’s computer, which had not heard a voice in
    perhaps millions of years. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Can you follow the
    tunnel to Neberdjer?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="ship computer">Yes.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Do it! Can you get Neberdjer to illuminate the
    inside?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="ship computer">Yes, I am tied in to Central.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Do it!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    A few seconds later all of Inner Patra-Bannk lit up in a dazzling
    display. Tunnel streaked this way and that, brilliant fluorescent
    lines. Sensor stations lit up like stars. Beams from the collection sphere
    radiated like searchlights into the blackness. Finally, one tunnel
    separated itself out from the rest, and Stringer knew which one to
    follow.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Computer, can you have Neberdjer tell you the
    position of the car in the tunnel?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="ship computer">Yes.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Do it. Stay ahead of it! Accelerate faster than
    gravity!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The ship shot through the void, outracing the tunnel that stretched before
    them. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Put on the suits!</q> Stringer commanded
    suddenly, and Valyavar and Barbalan obeyed. Stringer hurriedly did the
    same, wincing as the pain from his wound rippled through his arm. Then he
    took over the controls from the computer. His body was shaking. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Brace yourselves,</q> was the only warning he gave
    before he circled the ship about and slammed it into the tunnel that
    trailed beside them.
  </p>

  <p>
    The ship thundered, and all three were thrown off their feet. Stringer
    heard the ugly gash of metal against metal and thought the world was caving
    in. Then everything was quiet. He turned the rocket about in an arc that
    must have been hundreds of kilometers in radius and crept back. From the
    gap in the tunnel’s lights he could see that the once continuous tube was
    rent in two by a huge ragged gash.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">How’s the ship?</q> Stringer asked, feeling the
    wound on his arm opening again.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Leaking,</q> Barbalan replied. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">You could have waited until Neberdjer.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I wasn’t in the mood,</q> Stringer said as he
    brought the ship to rest near the break in the tunnel. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Now we wait.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    It wasn’t long before Pike’s car slowed to a halt just at the break in the
    tunnel. Stringer picked up his kalan and staggered toward the air lock.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Where are you going?</q> Barbalan cried.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer didn’t answer.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">You’re hurt, Stringer; don’t be a fool.</q>
    Barbalan planted herself before the hatch.
  </p>

  <p>
    Again Stringer did not answer. He pushed her out of the way. Because of his
    wounded arm, Barbalan could easily have overpowered him, but she
    didn’t. She saw the burning, fixated eyes and knew that even if she would
    never see him again, Stringer must pass.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Don’t struggle. Please,</q> she said softly as
    Stringer disappeared through the air lock.
  </p>

  <p>
    He emerged near the mouth of the tube. The smashed end was directly beside
    him, and he lowered himself carefully over the edge. He swung inward and
    dropped the four-meter diameter to the bottom.
  </p>

  <p>
    The car sat not far away, no longer hovering above hydrogen tracks. Its
    lights dimly reflected down the tunnel. Stringer walked slowly, crouched
    and kalan drawn. He felt his way between car and tunnel wall to the rear
    entrance and had put his hand on the manual latch when he remembered suits
    that could be found within for visiting poisonous areas. He yanked open the
    door and a spacesuited Pike dove over him, like a Gostum, and slammed onto
    the tunnel floor. Stringer began to back up the curved wall. Only then did
    he see Pike’s heavy sword. Clearly, one touch alone would be allowed in
    this duel. If his suit ripped, or Pike’s weapon touched his own and the
    kalan shattered, that would signal his opponent’s victory. But the kalan
    was lighter and faster than a Gostum sword, and that would be useful, too.
  </p>

  <p>
    An instant before Stringer had recovered, Pike was up and swung the
    blade. Stringer ducked, falling once again between car and tunnel. Blood
    from his wounded arm was dripping in his suit. He heard the grate of iron
    against solid hydrogen as Pike’s blow barely missed. Where had the man’s
    speed come from? The pain in Stringer’s right arm welled up and he felt
    dizzy. He passed his kalan to his left hand and moved back. Now both were
    wedged between the two walls. Stringer lunged, gritting his teeth. Pike
    kept his distance too well. Stringer regained his balance and sprang
    backward. Now he was in front again, between car and tunnel break. Suddenly
    Stringer slipped on the curved wall. Pike made the best of his
    chance. Stringer’s kalan, caught between blade and wall, snapped.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">And now I’m proving to be more troublesome than you
    expected,</q> Pike’s voice taunted over the suit radio. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Being a Gostum requires some training, you realize. But,
    Stringer, why are you so slow? You’re making this very easy.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer almost shut off the receiver but didn’t. He kept backing up,
    holding his broken kalan low, feeling the blood run down his right arm. The
    pain returned. Stringer began to shake and his vision blurred
    momentarily. For a fraction of a heartbeat he though he saw, not Pike in
    front of his eyes, but himself. He shook his head violently.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">You’re hesitating, Stringer. Why? I’ve never seen you
    hesitate to kill someone before.</q> Pike’s voice was hypnotic.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer shook his head and backed up farther. <em ab:speaker="Stringer">Who am I fighting?</em> he heard a distant part of
    himself ask. <em ab:speaker="Barbalan">Don’t struggle,</em> Barbalan’s
    warning came to him again. Stringer suddenly stood up straight and breathed
    deeply.
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike screamed and swung.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer rolled aside as one leg slipped over the break. He desperately
    shifted his body weight and hung on with all his strength. Pike’s swing had
    carried him too far and he toppled over the edge, entering free fall once
    again.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Save me!</q> came the hysterical voice over the radio.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer scrambled back into the tube, steadied himself, and looked out
    into the speckled blackness. He saw nothing that could be Pike. He took a
    deep breath and sighed.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">So,</q> he said softly, <q ab:speaker="Stringer">you’re about to reach your goal, the metallic
    hydrogen factory. Down there, on the energy collection sphere, where the
    gravity is the thousands of gees required to make the stuff, you will find
    your treasure. It is yours, Commander.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer shut off the radio and collapsed on the tunnel floor.
  </p>

  <p>
    Valyavar, who had witnessed the fight from above, quickly swung down to his
    companion, landing heavily on the tube.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Stringer?</q> he said.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer waved Valyavar aside and got to his feet unaided. He still held
    the broken kalan loosely in his left hand. He took a long look at the
    ancient bloodstains that ornamented the blade, sighed, and tossed the kalan
    over the edge. With Valyavar’s arm around him and Barbalan’s help from
    above, Stringer climbed back into the ship.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">To Central,</q> he said wearily. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">To go?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">All right,</q> Barbalan replied. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">But put your helmet back on. Your impetuosity has
    given us a crippled ship and not much time.</q>
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    Karrxlyn was angry at the delay. And he tired quickly of twiddling his
    fingers. <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">Fara-Ny, let me attack. Don’t you see
    that the Commander has deserted us, reverted to his old ways? Triesk can be
    ours within the beclad and this will all be over.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Fara-Ny stood up int he council room and wiped the sweat off his ancient
    brow. <q ab:speaker="Fara-Ny">I cannot argue. You are right. Lead the
    attack.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Karrxlyn stalked out of the room and galloped into the main camp. <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">To your feet! I am in command! We attack now. This is
    the final attack!</q> The Gostum army rose to its feet and was ready.
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    Alhane looked down from the walls of Ta-tjenen and sighed. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Do what you can,</q> he told those around him. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Get the reflectors. I’ll make sure we have all the
    electric fluid we can get.</q> In his voice there was little trace of
    hope. He turned to Taljen, who had not left him all this time. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I can’t think of anything else to do,</q> he said
    flatly.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Time Keeper, if you can’t think of anything else to
    do, who can?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I hope Stringer has.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen bit her lip. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Stringer, Polkraitz, has failed
    us.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane shook his head. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">He may have failed, that I
    don’t know, but I am sure he was always on our side.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Even now I am not sure that I believe that,
    considering what has come before.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Surely you must.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Why? How has he shown it? You heard him on the walls
    declaring to all that he was Polkraitz. He lied all the time.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Did you read the journal he kept, the one I gave
    you?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen nodded somewhat meekly.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">He loved you. Did you love him, ever?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen hesitated, then shook her head. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">What
    difference does it make? Besides, he has another…</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Do I detect anger in that?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Because of another? At Ta-tjenen?</q> Taljen’s laugh
    was a sneer.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I’m told you tried to kill him earlier.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen tried unsuccessfully to smile. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Not because of
    that, but because I thought…</q> Her words stumbled. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Oh, I don’t know.…After all this, I…I don’t know who or
    what he is.…</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Well,</q> Alhane said, taking her arm, <q ab:speaker="Alhane">we shall have to wait and find out.</q>
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">You still haven’t told us what you are going to
    do,</q> Barbalan pleaded as Stringer sat down with Neberdjer.
  </p>

  <p>
    He dropped his helmet to the floor and caught his breath. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I’m going to play God.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Valyavar raised his bushy eyebrows. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Not content to
    have found him?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">No. You said there was no god of healing in this
    story. Now we’re going to take his place. This may be the way to do it. The
    black hole down there contains an inconceivable amount of angular
    momentum…</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Puzzled, Barbalan shook her head, but Valyavar’s eyes grew wide in
    disbelief.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">You aren’t!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">By Sarek, I sure as hell am. Neberdjer, can you
    transfer the angular momentum of the black hole to the shell?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">Of course. There would be little point in a
    planet like this if that operation couldn’t be done.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">But think of what you’ll do!</q> Valyavar said. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">The climate will change—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">That’s the idea.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">You might kill off half the life on this
    planet.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I don’t think so. I think life will flourish. What
    little life there is now, in the <q>temperate</q> regions mostly, has
    assumed two tracks: one for the Patra and one for the Bannk. Now the
    necessity will disappear and the two tracks will merge into one.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">The winds—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Yes, they’ll start changing, too. Coriolis forces
    are going to start making things interesting. We might even start a
    world-sized hurricane or tornado. Maybe seasons, too, if this planet is
    tilted.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">Approximately twenty degrees to the ecliptic,</q>
    Neberdjer interrupted, <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">adjustable, naturally.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Valyavar remained unconvinced. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Millions of years
    of evolution and—Sarek—you might even melt the polar icecaps. A fine fix
    Ta-tjenen will be in then—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Then they’ll have to move inland.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Little Stringer, who can say what you are going to
    do if you speed this planet up? We don’t even know why it is so slow to
    begin with.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Neberdjer, why is the rotational speed of this
    planet so slow?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">No information on this.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Useless! Neberdjer, why couldn’t you have been
    made foolproof?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">Perhaps,</q> Neberdjer replied calmly, <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">for the same reason one can’t make a foolproof
    Stringer.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer scowled. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">All right. You’re correct that
    we may wreck a lot of ecology, but I’m not sure. You think that the long
    term may be disastrous. I can’t see that being any more disastrous than it
    is now. There may also be hundreds of other tribes on this planet by
    accident that we haven’t even discovered. Patra-Bannk is that big. But we
    don’t know. We don’t know about any of that. What we do know is that
    thousands of people are going to die and that tens of thousands of people
    are always on the verge of dying because things are so impossible now. Your
    arguments put a lot of <q>ifs</q> against what I know already. I’m willing
    to gamble that my hunch is correct—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">What’s that?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Neberdjer, in your activation timetable, are you
    scheduled to speed up this planet to a faster rotation?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">Yes, but not for about ten-to-the-sixteenth light
    meters—excuse me, a few years yet.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Then I’ll gamble. I want you to do it now.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">It is out of sequence. Is there good reason to do
    it?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You’ve heard my arguments. Haven’t you been
    listening?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">Yes, but I have had no experience with these
    people and, I must confess, do not understand the problem.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">They’re going to die is the problem!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">I was not brought up with that concept; it is
    difficult. Besides, after having dealt with a number of people at this
    point, I would say, that, by and large, it would make more sense to let
    them die off. Certainly it makes more sense to worry about the fungus and
    lichen than about people.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer bit his lip and thought about that for a moment. Finally he said,
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Neberdjer, will you do it for me? Because I tried
    my best to help you? Because I played my rodoft for you?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The pause before the reply was noticeable. <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">All
    right, Stringer, I will. I don’t see any difficulties at the moment. But if
    something should unexpectedly go wrong, I may have to slow the planet down
    again.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I’ll accept that. Then, Barbalan, wouldn’t you say
    it’s time to stop thinking? Neberdjer, speed up the shell until it has a
    revolution period of one beclad.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">A beclad? Can you convert that to geometric
    units?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">No, I can’t! Make it about once every sixty-five
    hours; I’ve told you what an hour is. We’ll make final adjustments
    later.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">How should this be done? The program in my
    timetable takes a number of years.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">We can’t wait that long! It has to be done within
    hours or less—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">The planetary damping mechanisms will be only
    quasi-effectual on such short time scales.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You mean things will slosh around a bit?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">That is an understatement.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer thought quickly. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Can’t you do something
    like increase the acceleration to a maximum by five hours and then back off
    by ten?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">Compared to the damping time scale of the ocean,
    that is a delta function, zero duration. I think a constant acceleration
    would give as reasonable results as might be hoped for.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Do you know what the effects on the planet will
    be?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">The planet is obviously made to withstand such
    maneuvers. Do you mean effects on the surface?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Of course!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">I will engage all the available planetary damping
    mechanisms, but things will, as you say, slosh around a bit. Detailed
    calculations would take several hours. Printouts for your inspections would
    take several years.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer slammed his fist on the console. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Do it
    anyway you want! Do it now! Ten hours!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">There is one important thing you have probably
    overlooked,</q> Neberdjer continued with an enraging calm. <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">Admittedly, it is a rather esoteric point.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer was getting very impatient. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">And what is
    that?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">I will have to increase the surface gravity
    somewhat.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer, Valyavar, and Barbalan together">You will?</q> all
    three shouted simultaneously. Admittedly, Stringer hadn’t foreseen this. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Why?</q> he gulped.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">We will be decreasing the angular momentum of the
    black hole and transferring it to the shell. This is equivalent to taking
    mass from the hole and adding to the shell. Thus, so far, the gravity is
    constant, less due to the decreased mass of the hole, more due to the
    increased mass of the shell. But we have slowed down the rotation of the
    hole in doing so. Efficient energy extraction for planetary operations
    requires that I have the shell rotating as fast as possible. This requires
    that I speed it up once more, or that more rotational energy be placed into
    the hole. Energy is mass. The mass of the hole will increase, and so will
    the surface gravity.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer touched the desk nervously. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">That could be
    bad. How much?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">It will be noticeable, but not critical for you
    humans, I would guess. The process will take several days.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Where will you get the extra mass?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">There are a number of possibilities. We could
    dump in more garbage, but at the moment don’t have enough in stock. You
    will notice only one other planet in the solar system at present—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">That’s fuel?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">What else would it be there for? We could take it
    out of orbit, crumble it up, and bring the pieces down through the Great
    Desert, but that would be cumbersome. The easiest thing to do is to send a
    signal to the next space tangential to this one at the hole and have the
    mass dumped in from that side. Symmetry, you know. One side’s as good as
    another.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer blinked. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What are you talking about?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">What makes you think that all of this planet is
    in one Universe?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The silence lasted forever as Stringer’s jaw fell open and long fingers
    found their way between strands of black hair. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Indeed,</q> he said quietly, bowing his head, <q ab:speaker="Stringer">if the world has an edge, it is not here.…</q>
    Eventually he looked up again. In a voice that trailed off to inaudibility,
    he said, <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Do it. Please do it…now.…</q>
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    Several hundred thousand kilometers beneath them, titanic forces began
    work that would transfer the angular momentum of the black hole to the
    outer shell. Inconceivable amounts of energy were tossed about like
    playthings. And Patra-Bannk began to spin faster and faster.…
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    With newly discovered spirit and adrenaline, the Gostum forces attacked
    Triesk, raining projectiles that crashed down on houses, splintered walls,
    and knocked people to the ground. Arrows rained down on Karrxlyn and his
    men, but the numbers became fewer and fewer, and between each barrage his
    men drew closer and closer to the top of the citadel.
  </p>

  <p>
    The men of Glintz were pushed back to the remains of their fleet, half of
    which had been destroyed by the rain of fire from the Gostum catapults and
    a quarter of which were burning now. Fent shot an arrow and was pleased to
    see one of the Gostum felled. His hand reached down to the quiver at his
    side and found it empty.
  </p>

  <p>
    The Gostum were no longer surprised by the magic fence and, as the previous
    Commander had instructed, cut through it quickly, destroying its
    powers. The summit was not far distant now.
  </p>

  <p>
    With the help of his children and a scattering of other, Alhane guided his
    reflectors into the eyes of his enemies as they swarmed up the remains of
    the citadel steps. But there were not enough reflectors now to start fires
    with the diffused sun; there were hardly enough to cause their foe to
    blink. The problem was simple and final: there was not enough of anything
    now, and the Gostum would soon reduce what remained of Ta-tjenen to a heap
    of ashes. The resignation was so complete that distraction had set in, and
    Alhane, at first, did not notice that he was having trouble focusing the
    light continuously. Suddenly he felt slightly, ever so slightly, dizzy, and
    he had to force himself to keep his eyes open and functioning. Had the
    reflectors in his hands become heavier? Or had the last of his strength
    finally given out?
  </p>

  <p>
    Soon the winds began changing direction. Alhane didn’t understand that at
    all. Patra-Bannk winds did not gust and veer like that without good
    reason. Why couldn’t the winds make up their minds which way they were
    blowing?
  </p>

  <p>
    The dizziness would not go away, and the failing strength in his arms fled
    even faster. The armies below were in confusion. Alhane felt the
    temperature rising. That had never happened so fast. Then the temperature
    fell again and Alhane was doubly confused. And then he heard the shouts all
    around him.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="many shouts in stereo">The sun! The sun has moved! We
    disobeyed the Polkraitz and the sun has moved!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The bows from the citadel stopped twanging. Alhane glanced up with the Time
    Keeper’s eyes that so accurately knew the position of the sun at all times,
    and nearly fainted.
  </p>

  <p>
    Meters below him, the giant warrior Karrxlyn fell to his knees. <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">Verlaxchi! Were you not on our side?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The winds veered again suddenly, making a complete about-face, and the last
    of the Gostum catapults stopped firing.
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    Little hope was in evidence as Fent and his men were pressed off the
    beach. <q ab:speaker="Glintz sailors">To the ships! Board the ships!</q> To
    heed the call was their last chance for survival. Ta-tjenen was doomed now,
    and there was no point in denying it further. Fent turned and ran headlong,
    but he jerked to a halt when he saw the Glintzan vessels far out to sea and
    being dragged farther yet as the water rushed away from the beach. Fent
    dropped his sword. If fate was so much against them, it was better to die
    now, immediately. Yet he now saw that the Gostum had halted their advance
    in confusion.  Perhaps they vaguely sensed, as Fent did himself, what was
    soon to follow the water’s retreat into the sea. Both armies turned about
    and ran headlong up the shore road as a giant crack of thunder split the
    sky and a huge storm cloud began building over the battlefield. Fent
    stumbled in the sand and picked himself up, overcoming heavy legs. Was
    still another god against him? If so, Fent wasn’t going to stop to worry
    about it.
  </p>

  <p>
    The fighting had now ceased on all fronts, completely, absolutely. Weapons
    discarded, the armies sought shelter at the acropolis of Ta-tjenen. The
    army of Glintz, preceded in diminishing meters by the Gostum forces,
    reached the citadel, followed by the rumbling of a huge tidal wave.
  </p>

  <p>
    Fent staggered up the ruined steps that he had unsuccessfully fought to
    relieve for so long. Now, as a deafening roar reached up from the beach to
    enfold them, no one attempted to stop him. He pushed and shoved upward
    while a mountainous wave rose and rushed the citadel, sweeping everything
    from its path. Finally, with spray flying through the air, he clung to a
    scaly vine growing on the slopes and collapsed as the rush of water threw
    him off balance. He held his breath for long moments. When that gave out,
    he swallowed water and spat—into air. He opened his eyes. He was still
    alive, but the Gostum camp below him had disappeared. He looked west and
    saw the remains of tents and pieces of catapults being carried away by the
    flooding waters, snagging on the flotsam and jetsam of the obliterated
    command headquarters. Fent pulled himself up and joined the throngs of
    people—Gostum, Trieskan, and Glintzans—who were jamming into the city.
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    At the start of the new Bannk three teclads earlier, Paddelack had first
    poked his head up beyond the underground plain. He had looked about him,
    noted the melting snow, sniffed cautiously, and, satisfied at being alive,
    filled his lungs with the still-cool air. He smiled his toothy grin and
    pulled on the tip of his nose. Indeed, it was pleasant to be alive.
  </p>

  <p>
    He and the Liddlefurans had spent the first teclads of the Bannk at
    Liddlefur, their coastal home, fishing and gathering food. When
    reconnaissance had shown Massarat to be deserted, Paddelack led his people
    back to their mountain home to prepare for the next Patra.
  </p>

  <p>
    About halfway along the two-hundred-kilometer trek, when the hills were
    turning into mountains, the ground suddenly rumbled three times in
    succession and Paddelack was thrown off his feet. Soon screams were rising
    about him, and Paddelack, too, caught a glimpse of the sun. It was in the
    wrong place! He took another look. No, he wasn’t dreaming. His followers
    gathered about him in search of an explanation while the wind also gathered
    itself into swirling, whirling dervishes. Paddelack could only shake his
    head and stare back into the blank faces surrounding him.
  </p>

  <p>
    Telclads later, another rumble was heard, this time from the
    coast. Paddelack turned around and a gasp rose in his throat. He
    frantically fished his telescope from his pack and through it watched
    Liddlefur disappear under the impact of a tidal wave.
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack quickly shouted, <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Come on! Up to that
    hill!</q> He began climbing in fury but found that his legs were not
    responding. What was this? Why did he feel so heavy? Nonetheless, his will
    overcame his reluctant flesh and he continued climbing.
  </p>

  <p>
    Several telclads after that, Paddelack sat perched atop the mountain
    surveying, not the coastal plain that had once extended below Massarat, but
    a great sea, smooth in texture but for an occasional peak rising above the
    water. He scratched his head and chuckled to himself. It would seem that
    Stringer had indeed discovered something about this ridiculous
    planet. Good. Perhaps sometime in the future, maybe now even
    <em>someday</em> in the future, he would meet Stringer again and get the
    full version of the story. Paddelack chuckled once more. For the moment, at
    least, he was satisfied with the outcome.
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    Alhane wandered aimlessly throughout a shattered Ta-tjenen. He wiped the
    rain from his dirty face—rain of early Bannk, never before felt, rain mixed
    with his own tears. Was he going mad? What power did Stringer possess to
    cause the sun to move like that, to cause the weather to change more
    rapidly than it had ever changed before, to cause the waters to pile up in
    a great hill? Had reason gone? Had all sense taken flight? Alhane’s mind
    futilely grasped for logic and fell into incomprehension.
  </p>

  <p>
    It might have been telclads later—although Alhane didn’t know what a
    telclad was any more—when, amid thundering and lightning, he found Effrulyn
    alive, leaning against the north wall. He was breathing heavily, his once
    glorious robe now shredded and covered with mud. Alhane hurried over to him
    and studied the younger man’s face for a moment until he himself began to
    shake. Effrulyn stared blankly in return.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">What is happening to the world?</q> Alhane cried,
    pummeling the other’s shoulders.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">That has never been my concern. It was your
    concern.</q> The words were monotonic and punctuated. Effrulyn tried to
    smile but failed. Then he, too, began to shiver.
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane leaned against the wall and stared down at the water lapping against
    his feet. A whining noise that was not the veering wind made itself known
    above the noise of the people and brought his attention to the central
    plaza, where a ship was landing amid the parting throngs who gathered there
    and beyond. They ran over, Effrulyn clumsily in his robe, Alhane clumsily
    in his years, both clumsily from fatigue.
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    Stringer stepped to the ground as a clap of thunder burst overhead,
    followed by a rumble beneath his feet. The town shook. Was that an
    earthquake, the planet’s homologous structure adjusting to the new balance
    of forces?
  </p>

  <p>
    The trembling stopped after a few moments and Stringer heard the cheers
    rise about him, pulsating throbbing cheers of these people mixed with the
    patter of falling rain. The crowd bowed down before him in expanding
    waves. <q ab:speaker="crowd">Polkraitz! Polkraitz!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    He waved his hands. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">No. None of that. No.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    He was unheard except by Valyavar, who commented in Bitter, <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">’Tseems to me that in some sense we might as well
    be. We fulfill all the requirements, yuh?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Except the most important one—</q> Stringer never
    finished the sentence. He spied Alhane pushing through the crowd near him,
    quivering, then sinking to his knees with the others. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">No! Not you, Alhane!</q> he shouted as he ran over to
    the silver-haired man. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Not you,
    Alhane. Please,</q> Stringer begged. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I am not
    Polkraitz. Please…</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane shook his head numbly. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">How can I conceive of
    what you have done to our world? It is beyond my understanding of
    anything…</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer held onto his friend and pulled him up by the shoulders. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You must believe, Alhane, that what I did was not
    magic. You may never understand it—I don’t quite myself—but your
    descendants will someday. You must believe that.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I’ll try,</q> Alhane replied softly.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">And you, too,</q> Stringer said to Effrulyn, who
    stood behind the Time Keeper.
  </p>

  <p>
    Effrulyn had not bowed down with the others: he was still in shock. Water
    dribbled from his soiled cape. <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">I will remain with
    mathematics. It is much safer, much less disturbing, and…much less
    trivial.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane scowled and then broke out into laughter. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">To
    the end, my young man, to the end,</q> he said, hitting Effrulyn on the
    side. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">All right, Stringer, Polkraitz or not, you
    have done what you have done.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer nodded and began walking through the crowd, unsuccessfully trying
    to get them to their feet. This one would touch his foot, another would bow
    his head as Stringer paused, hair falling into a puddle of water. Most
    would scurry out of the way, but no one would stand. Stringer started out
    slowly. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Get up!</q> he said to each in turn,
    futilely attempting to lift them. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Get up,
    please!</q> Nothing. Then Neberdjer’s words came back to him; like many
    things that unique being had said, they held more than a grain of truth. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Don’t you see?</q> Stringer shouted. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Don’t you understand what you are? You are all the
    same—it is you who are Polkraitz, not I. Don’t you understand?</q> There
    was no response. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Please get up!</q> His voice
    became hysterical. He began shouting more and more frantically as he
    struggled with his worshipers. Why weren’t they listening? Was his voice
    drowned out by the downpour? Then he spied Taljen. She was on her knees
    with the others. He stepped up to her, but she flinched at his touch and
    lowered her head.
  </p>

  <p>
    So, now he was Polkraitz hero instead of Polkraitz traitor. And what was
    the difference? Indeed, the difference was less than the width of an ant’s
    eyebrow.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Taljen, you must also try to understand…</q> he
    said finally as he took her chin in his hand and forced her eyes to meet
    his.
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen’s only response was to jump to her feet and stumble away. Stringer
    followed, the crowd parting for him as he splashed along. He caught up with
    her as she entered the battered remains of the meeting tent. Rain fell
    through where the roof used to be, and beat on the ground. Taljen stood
    under the great map of the world which hung cockeyed from the one rope
    still attached to a surviving beam. Her eyes flitted from the map to
    Stringer and back again for a long moment. Then, with tears in her eyes,
    she took one last look at Stringer, broke into convulsive sobs, and
    fled. Stringer sighed and raised his hand to stop her, but he did not
    follow. He brushed aside the wet hair from his wet eyes and left the ruined
    Center to a dying thunderstorm.
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    The weather as well as the gravity began to settle down within the next few
    beclad-days. Every few telclads Stringer would check the pod-trees in the
    park. As he suspected, every night they showed a tendency to close, but
    they never completed the actions before the sun rose again. He came away
    satisfied that they would survive for some ages—even if in a state of
    bewilderment. The water, too, had almost receded to its normal level,
    leaving wet fields ripe for planting. And although it was still too early
    to tell, Stringer had made a bet with Valyavar that the season would be
    spring.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Yes,</q> Stringer said to Alhane in the meeting
    tent, <q ab:speaker="Stringer">you’ll find out what a real season is, just
    as you have already found out what a real day and night are. But for the
    moment we have some work to do. Even with all the Gostum and everybody else
    here, you haven’t been able to scrounge up enough food to survive much
    longer. I think I can persuade Neberdjer, my friend at the equator, to
    manufacture some food and supplies for you until you learn how to get your
    farming in sequence with the new seasons. That has to be done quickly, and
    perhaps some medicine, too. Maybe Neberdjer will duplicate some that I have
    aboard the shuttle. I’m not a doctor and don’t know what you need, but
    we’ll try.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Thank you, Stringer,</q> Alhane said.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">And we’ll check back with you to see if the length
    of the day is right or whether you want it adjusted. We can do that.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">It is a powerful thing to be able to do.…Do you
    realize how much more sensible it would have been to discover gravity after
    you speeded up Patra-Bannk?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Easier, perhaps, but not as gratifying. You did
    almost the impossible. A powerful thing to be able to do.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane smiled. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">There are still some great
    puzzles,</q> he said as they walked out into the afternoon sun. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Effrulyn’s constant will have to be measured if we are
    to determine the density of Patra-Bannk. I have an idea of how to do it,
    but it requires knowing how far away Effrulyn’s home is.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer chuckled to himself and gazed at the ruined sundial markings
    beneath his feet, the great sundial that kept time for all of
    Ta-tjenen. The metal was broken in places and tarnished by the pyres that
    had burned there. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Well, you won’t need this any
    more, at least not with the same scales.…Effrulyn,</q> he called out to the
    former Gostum standing nearby. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Did I see a
    pendulum clock at the Gostum headquarters?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">Yes, the first impure thing I designed there. I’ve
    never forgiven myself.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer couldn’t help but laugh. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Good. Then,
    Alhane, I suggest you switch to constant units of time—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">The clads and belclads were always constant—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Not with your clocks. Use Effrulyn’s. It’s more
    accurate.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">How do you know?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Effrulyn will explain the details. But since you
    won’t believe him, anyway, I suggest you build one and try it yourself. You
    now have more sunrises to check it against.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">But,</q> Effrulyn interrupted, <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">the point of my clock is that it is more accurate
    than one can read the sun’s shadow.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">How do you know?</q> Alhane asked.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">By theory.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Theory! What good is that, I’d like to know? I want
    something to check it against.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">Against what, if it is the most accurate clock
    there is?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer put his hands over his ears until the two stopped arguing. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Alhane,</q> Stringer said when finally there was
    silence, <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Taljen…?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">She can’t see you,</q> Alhane said, turning away.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">She won’t? I understand.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">She’s sick. She can’t see you even if she wanted to,
    but she doesn’t want to.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Sick? Taljen has never been sick for all the time
    I’ve known her.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Stringer,</q> Alhane said, trying not to look at
    him, <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Taljen tried to kill herself—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What!</q> Stringer shouted.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I’ve never heard of such a thing at Ta-tjenen. It
    has never happened before, to my knowledge.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Let me see her!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">No, Stringer, I am not so sure that is a good
    idea.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Let me see her!</q> Stringer shouted again, and
    Alhane gave in. He took Stringer to the house where Taljen was lying. She
    was sleeping on the mat, breathing slowly and regularly.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Is she all right?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">She will be. She is just sleeping now. I am sorry,
    Stringer.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer shook his head. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">No, I’m sorry. I’m just
    beginning to realize, to understand, what I must have done to her
    world.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">It wasn’t your fault.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer glared at Alhane in anguish. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Whose was
    it, then? Name one other person who caused this, show me one other fact,
    then I will be satisfied. But you can’t—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">What point in this, Stringer?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What point? What point? How could I have been so
    careless—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Stringer, you are gestating your own hell over a
    missed chance. If you aren’t careful it will consume your life. Don’t let
    it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer looked up abruptly. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Alhane, I was going
    to tell you to stop the Parlztluzan—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">What? With the population decimated now to where it
    was after the revolt? How else could it be kept up?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I was going to say, <q>Look at Glintz; be like
    them.</q> Or I was going to point to you and Effrulyn, you who hated your
    parents, Effrulyn who lives among Gostum madmen. Yes, I was even going to
    say, <q>Look at us. Maybe it is my species and not yours that is doomed by
    its own exponential growth and it will be the Tjenens who survive and not
    people like me. Why institute the Parlztluzan to lose your
    advantage?</q></q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer glanced down at Taljen. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">But there is
    this, too. Is this what I have brought?</q> He sighed. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I don’t know. You will have to decide for
    yourselves.…</q> He bent to kiss the sleeping girl. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Or let Taljen decide. She’ll know better than anyone
    else. Of that I am sure.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer and Alhane left the house and began to walk to the ship in the
    cool breeze. They passed by the ruined meeting tent and entered. Stringer
    stared at the map hanging cockeyed. Rage built within him. He wanted to
    scream, <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You, you were the cause of all this!</q>
    He wanted to tear the map down and kick it into splinters and scatter the
    slivers to the four corners of the world. He didn’t. Now the world didn’t
    have corners. Silently, calmly, as the others looked on, he took his knife
    and cut the map down. He carried it outside, past a pyre burning the
    recently dead. He stopped and lifted the map above his head, high, to throw
    it on the flames. He didn’t. He carried it with him to the ship.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Will you keep the name <q>Ta-tjenen</q>? Certainly
    <q>Patra-Bannk</q> will have to be changed.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane smiled. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">We’ll think of something. How about
    <q>Wet and Dry</q>?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer laughed aloud and with a wave of his hand jumped into the ship.
  </p>

  <p>
    Barbalan greeted him with an embrace. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">You seem to
    be a little sad,</q> she said, brushing away the tear on his cheek.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">More than a little. I am beginning to realize some
    of the mistakes I’ve made. I’m not sure if I’ve saved Ta-tjenen or wrecked
    it completely.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">We did what we could, my Stringer.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Did I?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">We did something. It is not expected to be
    perfect.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer nodded. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Well, next time I will do
    better, with your help, I suspect. And now I—we—have some patching up to
    do. First there is Ta-tjenen and then a lot of villages down the coast—if
    they still exist. I’m glad almost everybody was up here for the siege, or
    we might have ended up killing more people than we saved.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Now Valyavar joined in. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">The decision did smack of
    your impetuosity, but it was made. And now we do what we can with the
    results. It is good to see, at least, that you are making it up to
    them.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer sighed deeply and shook his head. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">No. You
    saw what happened at the plaza when we landed. No. There is still no
    fondness for me in Ta-tjenen and no fondness for Ta-tjenen in me. I wish I
    could say I am feeling generous toward them. No.</q> Once again Stringer
    took a deep breath and sighed. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">But that doesn’t
    alter what needs to be done, does it?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Both Barbalan and Valyavar nodded. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">I think,
    Stringer,</q> Barbalan said, <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">that perhaps you
    feel toward them more than you admit.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Do you expect me to be a saint—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">—or a maniac?</q> Valyavar finished. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Let’s not waste our brains pondering the
    distinction. After all, we have work to do, and we eventually want to get
    around to exploring this planet. Lots to find still. Unless you had planned
    on heading back to Two-Bit.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer chuckled. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Talk about pointless
    suggestions. You’re right, lots to find still. Maybe we can discover when
    the Designers will show up.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">A knotty one, that. God’s being somewhat
    malicious these days, isn’t he?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">As you said, he’s only interested in truth when it
    suits him.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">That reminds me. Did you ever tell Alhane or
    Effrulyn that this was an artificial planet?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer cocked his head and thought a moment. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">No,
    I’m sure that I didn’t. But I suspect it won’t be too long before they
    figure it out themselves. Although I could go and tell them. It would make
    life easier.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">No,</q> Valyavar said, catching Stringer by the
    arm. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">We’ve changed things too much as it is. Now,
    if God is being malicious, let them find out in their own way.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer nodded. He picked up his rodoft from the seat and plucked a
    chord. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">A song?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Barbalan and Valyavar smiled, and they all laughed again.
  </p>

  <nav><a href="twir_37.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown-bottom" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown-bottom&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_39.xhtml">Next »</a></nav></body></html>