<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:ab="http://example.org/audiobook-schema" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>The World is Round, Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="twir.css" />
  <link rel="icon" href="icon.svg" />
</head>
<body><nav><a href="twir_11.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_13.xhtml">Next »</a></nav><h2><div>Chapter Eleven</div>Homecoming</h2>

  <p>
    The water was getting rougher under the tutelage of the winds. It splashed
    up over bow and stern as the crewmen tied the small craft to the
    dock. Stringer strapped on his kalan and holstered his graser across his
    chest.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">And why is this?</q> the Time Keeper asked as he came
    out of the cabin with a bundle of paper hidden beneath his oiled jacket.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">That’s a long story,</q> Stringer replied, his
    sack slung over the bow.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Where are you going, Hurried Stringer?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">To my ship.</q> Stringer paused on the dock
    briefly. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Tell me, are you called anything else
    besides Time Keeper?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Of course,</q> the Time Keeper chuckled. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">My name is Alhane.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Good. I’ll see you again.</q> Stringer hurried off
    with the rain lashing his face, over the rise and up the once sandy
    road. It was a few kilometers to the city, which he avoided, skirting
    around the acropolis and heading past the fields. He soon entered the
    nearest part of the forest, which was still intact. The trees were almost
    fully closed, and Stringer could smell the resin that was binding the trunks
    together. They bent this way and that in the stiff wind, and Stringer
    covered his eyes with his hands to protect his face.
  </p>

  <p>
    Finally he reached <em>Number One</em>. As he expected, it lay there
    untouched. He doubted that any Tjenen would think of touching it, much less
    molesting it. The forward hatch opened to his usual heavy tug and he
    climbed in. Ash, having found its way through the shattered window, covered
    both console and floor, and the rain water had mixed with it, forming an
    ugly slime. Stringer opened one of the storage bins behind the cockpit and
    fetched a sheet of malleable plastic insulation. After a few moments he had
    managed to fix it tightly over the window. Then he pressed for fuel
    readings. He checked the storage bins for food rations. He went to the
    computer console and punched in a few numbers. The answers returned
    instantaneously. The numbers on the screen reflected off his eyes, and he
    bit his lip and tapped his fingers on the console. The answer was no answer
    at all. He had enough food, or could certainly muster anything else he
    needed. The remaining fuel might be enough to heat the shuttle for the
    Patra, the long Short Patra. But then again, it might not. Stringer pursed
    his lips and nodded. Well, he would find out soon enough.
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    Alhane stumbled past a yard littered with his collection of instruments and
    tripped into a house equally littered. He was tired after the long
    expedition and wanted only to sleep. He dumped his armload of papers onto
    the first chair beyond the door and began to remove his cloak.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Alhane! I was hoping you would be in about now.</q>
    The voice from the workroom was a familiar one, and he walked into his shop
    to see his former pupil, present assistant, Taljen. She ran up to him and
    encircled his small body with her own. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">It is good to
    see you again. It has been a long Bannk without you.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">And equally long without you, my young helper. Tell
    me, are my children about?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">No, they are off trying to build something to
    impress you, no doubt. A strange thing to have children. And tell me, my
    Favorite Fool Alhane, have you discovered your empty theory yet?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane smiled. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">No, I am sure that one glance at your
    data will tell me that I was right. Let me see your Mid-bannk readings.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen showed him the papers she had kept. Alhane looked for the shortest
    length of any shadow that Taljen had recorded, as well as those she had
    collected and averaged from the other helpers. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Aha!
    You see, I was right. There is absolutely no question any longer. Five
    centimeters’ difference at least between my shortest and all of yours. Look
    at this.</q> Alhane ran into the other room and brought in his own data.
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen ran her eyes over it, nodded slowly, and sat down on a chair.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Why, you don’t seem to be very happy about it. This
    is a great occasion, is it not?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">You could still be wrong. It is only a handful of
    centimeters. A mistake would be all too probable. To change, the shape of
    the world on a handful of centimeters…</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">But the trend! The difference is bigger than it was
    at Glintz. Look here! The trend! It’s what you’d expect if you travel
    further, isn’t it? And the times and all the other objections? We’ve gone
    over that before.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I…I guess you’re right,</q> Taljen said. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Oh, I don’t know.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Why, then, are you so unhappy? It doesn’t matter
    that I was right or that you were wrong, but that we have found out
    something about the world that we didn’t know before. Isn’t that enough?
    Why bring ideology into it?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">It’s not that at all. It’s that…that maybe I have
    made a mistake; I’m not sure.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">There is certainly nothing wrong with making
    mistakes, as long as we make them as fast as possible.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">It has nothing to do with the experiment, Teacher,
    but with the Alien. I thought he was just a murderer who talked with ideas
    crazier than your own, who asked stupid questions that were impossible to
    answer and got everyone he met angry at him.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I have met an Alien on my trip, and his questions
    were most interesting.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">What?</q> Taljen looked up abruptly and grabbed
    Alhane’s arm. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Tell me his name! Do you know it?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Yes, of course. His name is Stringer and he is
    somewhere about now. I brought him back when we found him stranded down the
    coast.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen froze. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Lashgar help us! He’s back. Benjfold…I
    must warn him. Who knows what will happen—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">What are you talking about?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen had already jumped out of the chair. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Stringer
    killed Mornli, my first brother’s nesta’s sister, when he came to Ta-tjenen
    and was going to be exposed. He tried to escape during the fire and
    Benjfold tried to kill him by throwing him overboard. There is no time; I
    must warn Benjfold.</q> Taljen started to run out of the room, but
    Alhane caught her.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Stringer didn’t seem like a murderer to me.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I don’t know what Stringer is, but he isn’t one of
    us, that’s all I can tell you. Now let me go.</q> She bolted out the door
    and Alhane shuffled after her.
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    Stringer was crossing the plaza, shining wet in the rain. The gnomon’s
    shadow was gone, wiped out by the black clouds, and he doubted that any
    Tjenen was aware of the time. Work would continue as long as possible,
    which wasn’t long now. Lightning streaked across the sky and thunder rolled
    over his head. The wind whipped at the battered old cloak that he had
    always worn on Two-Bit, and he had to walk hunched over, holding the guy
    ropes so as not to be blown over by the wind. His kalan felt good thumping
    against his thigh. It was anxious to be used. The gong of the town bell,
    its restraining rope broken, clanged in the howling wind against Stringer’s
    ear.
  </p>

  <p>
    People were slinging nets over their houses and tying the ends to stakes
    that were everywhere driven into the ground. Now he understood their
    function: the real winds were on their way.
  </p>

  <p>
    <em>Clang!</em>
  </p>

  <p>
    He pulled his hood more tightly around his face and kept walking in long,
    hunched strides. Uslid’s house was not far.
  </p>

  <p>
    He passed the main gateway. Supplies were being taken Under for the Patra,
    the long Short Patra. Huge carts, loaded with household good, food, and now
    the precious wood for fuel, disappeared into the mouths of the
    gateways. The wind was biting and the cool rain heavy.
  </p>

  <p>
    Uslid’s house was third after <q>Chicken Market.</q> The Tjenens named
    intersections or places, not streets. A stupid convention, thought
    Stringer; it made giving directions impossible. But everyone in Ta-tjenen
    seemed to know everyone else and where they lived. And even he knew where
    he was going.
  </p>

  <p>
    <em>Clang! Clang!</em>
  </p>

  <p>
    It was late Bannk and, of necessity, the doors to the houses were shut. The
    house of Uslid was crisscrossed with rope and staked down. Stringer could
    not tell if anyone was inside. There was as good a chance that they would be
    asleep as not; everyone went by his own cycle. Stringer drew his kalan.
  </p>

  <p>
    The door opened easily; Tjenens’ doors were never locked. Stringer took
    three steps before Benjfold looked up.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer undid his hood and pushed it back from his head. Benjfold gasped
    and fell backward off his stool, flattening himself against the creaking
    wall.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Give me one good reason why I shouldn’t pierce
    your throat,</q> Stringer said, swinging the knife point under the other’s
    chin.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">You wouldn’t risk killing me, not after the
    first—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Why not? Ta-tjenen and I are nearing the parting
    of the ways, anyway, Benjfold Traitor. I was to leave you in good faith
    before and you tricked me. Why shouldn’t I leave you permanently now?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">You are Polkraitz; this is the Golun-Patra. You
    caused the fire, you and the Gostum.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">If you believe that, you are more of a fool than I
    thought.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">You would not leave Ta-tjenen alive if you killed
    me.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">So what else is new?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Benjfold screwed up his face into a contorted knot of fear, and Stringer
    nodded his usual slow nod. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You begin to understand
    what it is like to be under a death sentence. How desperate are you? What
    will you do to live? What kind of bargain will you strike?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">I…I don’t know. I don’t understand,</q> Benjfold
    managed to cough out. A crack of thunder obscured his last words.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Of course you don’t. Everyone you’ve ever known is
    a close friend. You’ve never been threatened by anything but Patra-Bannk
    in your life.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen broke in at that instant, with Alhane puffing behind her. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Stringer!</q> she screamed, her voice the highest
    pitch. She dove at him, knocking his arm away. The point of the kalan
    grazed Benjfold’s throat and a thin line of blood trickled out. Stringer
    spun around and was gone in a lightning-streaked gray sky.
  </p>

  <p>
    Benjfold got up with his hand clasped around his neck and walked to the
    door. He started out for many moments before Taljen turned him around.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">He almost killed you!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">I’m not sure,</q> replied Benjfold. <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">I’m not sure at all.</q> Then he went to bandage his
    wound.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">So,</q> said Alhane, turning to Taljen. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Don’t you think Stringer had good reason to want to
    kill Benjfold? Benjfold had tried to kill Stringer before, is that not
    right?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Yes, but what difference does that make? Stringer
    just wanted—</q> Revenge was a word that Taljen didn’t have in her
    vocabulary. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">It would be as if I were to kill you or
    my third nesta, or my mother’s third cousin.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">And what about Benjfold wanting to kill Stringer?
    Whoever heard of that?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Stringer has caused many problems.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">But, I ask you, is it worth abandoning him to the
    Patra for those problems?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">If he is a killer—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">And Benjfold? A killer? Who would believe it? There
    is too much in Stringer to be wasted, my young friend, and I think you see
    that.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen nodded with tears in her eyes. She had not cried in many
    Patra-Bannks. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Alhane, you are better at confusing
    things than anyone I have ever met—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Except Stringer. What will you do to help him
    live?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen tossed her hair, heavy and wet. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">What can be
    done now?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">There may be one thing. The nestrexa is at the heart
    of Ta-tjenen, am I not right?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Yes, but for yourself, that binds us all
    together. It is true.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">The Parlztluzan is later this beclad, Taljen.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen stared at Alhane wide-eyed in shock, but he was already at the
    door. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Tell me, where is Stringer’s ship?</q>
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    Later, after a long, well-deserved sleep, Alhane stepped into the clearing
    and saw Stringer’s shuttle. He admired it for a moment before searching out
    the entrance. When he found it, he pulled the latch open without
    knocking. Knocking wouldn’t have occurred to him. But he did hesitate, not
    out of politeness or concern, but because of the slow, mournful music
    emerging from the craft and mixing with the whistling wind and pounding
    rain, struggling to be heard over the frequent thunder. The playing was not
    badly in tune, he thought, but could certainly be better, especially with
    the seventh harmonic off so consistently.
  </p>

  <p>
    He was surprised to see Stringer sitting on the floor, playing a rodoft,
    bowing a melody slowing and deliberately. Stringer ignored him. Alhane took
    this opportunity to look around the craft. He walked forward a step or two
    into the cockpit and back into the cargo hold. He saw a great deal of empty
    space back there, and the hollow amplified the sound of raindrops falling
    on the roof.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What do you want?</q> came Stringer’s voice from
    behind him.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I’ve been told that you plan on staying here for the
    Patra.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I’ve told no one that.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">We guess well. Do you realize how foolish that is?
    How impossible?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">This ship is made for worse conditions than are
    found on your planet—if you can believe it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">But you’d be alone, and it will be a Short Patra,
    longer than this Bannk.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I have a rodoft and my mind.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Perhaps, Young Stringer, your mind will be your
    worst enemy. And if you survive, what will you do then, I ask you?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer continued to bow absently on the rodoft and pluck its strings. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I came with companions who are now lost. I must find
    them if they are to be found. So I will go south.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane sat down. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I didn’t know there were
    others. How far are they?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">When I left them, about one hundred thousand
    kilometers, a little more.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The Time Keeper shook his head. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Humph. A long way,
    to be sure. A hundred thousand! No one at Ta-tjenen thinks in terms of ten
    kilometers, let alone a hundred thousand. If not for my calculations, I
    thank them, I wouldn’t have believed the world was that big myself.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I know. I’ve gone through that before, but this
    ship travels that kind of distance.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">But I see it is damaged. Will you still fly?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">No. I’ll sail, walk, I don’t know. Do you think I
    will stay here?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane shook his head. His silver hair was bright in the cabin light, and
    he had to talk loudly to penetrate the noise of the rain. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">And what will you do next Patra, another Short one, and
    the Patra after that, which is Long, and during the Bannks in between?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What do you suggest?</q> Stringer sighed, finally
    putting down the bow and looking up for the first time.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">First you have to live through the Patra—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I plan on doing my best.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">—and then at the beginning of the Bannk you could
    make a balloon.…No, that wouldn’t work; it’s too slow and unreliable.…At
    the beginning of the Bannk…Wait! That’s it! It might work. It’s possible. I
    may be correct—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">A moment, I ask you, wait a moment.…</q> Alhane put
    his hand to his chin. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Yes, why not? At the beginning
    of the Bannk and almost all through the Bannk, the ocean is cooler than the
    land; I’ve measured it myself, I’ll not tell you otherwise. And you can see
    the air rising over the land where the clouds form. Then they are carried
    south by the prevailing winds.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I’ve noticed that.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Then the answer is clear: glide!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Oh, come on. You can’t take a sailplane one
    hundred thousand kilometers! We don’t even know if the wind is south all
    the way.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">It’s my guess that it is.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I’m not so sure. Still, you have to stop
    sometime. You need food, sleep. The best I’ve flown is about a thousand
    kilometers on a good day.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">A day? Do you mean a good Bannk? A good Bannk lasts
    six teclads. And the next Bannk is the longest, thirty per cent longer than
    this one. Yes, it is the Killer Bannk—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">A pleasant thought…I’d still have to land, and once
    I land that’s it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">There certainly must be towns along the way. They
    could launch you with grask, as we will here. Grask, as you undoubtedly
    know, are very strong and can run very fast. There is no problem. In theory
    it should work.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">In theory.</q> Stringer got up and sat at the
    computer. he punched in a code to produce a map from the trip north. He fed
    in a scale to reduce the pictures to microfilm. He took a hand viewer from
    the cabinet. He clamped the viewing cassette to the output of the map
    maker, and when one hundred thousand kilometers’ worth of microfilm had
    been fed into it, he took a quick look through the magnifier. A few minutes
    later he said, <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Yes, there are towns. We must have
    missed them on the way up because they were too small to see or because we
    were going so fast, or because of the haze. Maybe the surprising thing is
    that we saw Ta-tjenen. But they’re there; the cameras caught them, even if
    they are no more than villages.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">So, you already have a map, I take it. All you have
    to do is land near the villages. Then up you go again with the help of a
    few grask.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer swiveled around in his seat. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">We still
    need a sailplane. I might be able to build one. Pike made me fly in them
    often enough; they’re similar to this shuttle in flight characteristics. I
    even had to take them apart and put them back together as training for
    emergencies. I think I could do it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">With my help. This should be an interesting
    project. All I’ve built so far are models.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I’ll have to check on the distances between
    towns.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I doubt you will find them far. Ta-tjenen was the
    first town, and how far do you think you can move a settlement in the Bannk
    before you die of the heat, before you must dig Under for the Patra? Moving
    on Patra-Bannks must be very slow. I’ve never met anyone from farther south
    than Godrhan, and I’ll tell you this: I’m surprised your map showed any
    villages at all.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer smiled. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">So you didn’t know. I suspected
    that. Well, I’ll have to check more carefully. But even if all this manages
    to work, we still have one problem.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">And what is that?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">When is this sailplane going to get built?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane laughed his soft chuckle. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">There is a Short
    Patra ahead—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">—with you under and me Above.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">The Going Under is not for half a teclad yet—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">But the teclads have been growing shorter, I’ve
    been told.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Remember,</q> said Alhane, holding up a finger, <q ab:speaker="Alhane">this is the Weird Bannk, and even the sunset seems too
    long, even if it isn’t. So we’ll work on it. Right now I need your help
    with an experiment.</q> With that, Alhane dragged Stringer to his feet and
    they went off together to the citadel amid heavy rain and thunder.
  </p>

  <p>
    The Time Keeper’s dwelling was on the outskirts of Ta-tjenen, close to the
    edge nearest Stringer’s shuttle. When they reached it, Stringer was
    surprised to find quadrants and similar pieces of apparatus scattered
    around the yard. A miniature version of the great plaza sundial dominated
    the setting, the gnomon—useless now at Bannk’s end—sticking straight out of
    the ground.
  </p>

  <p>
    The Time Keeper pushed the door open and led Stringer inside, and Stringer
    almost laughed aloud. How unlike any Tjenen house he had seen before! The
    four rooms were amazingly cluttered. Parchments littered the floor and
    tables along with oddly shaped glassware. Models hung from the ceiling; a
    fire burned in a corner under a metal pan. A plank with insects stuck to it
    was propped up on a cabinet filled with great dusty notebooks. A faded
    portrait of a man and a woman dangled from the ceiling.
  </p>

  <p>
    And then there were the clocks. The workroom was filled with the ticking
    and buzzing of dozens of clocks standing on the floor, on shelves, on top of
    one another. Some glittered; others were dull and crudely built. One would
    click rapidly like a ratchet wheel, another would creak with rust, a third
    would drip water, drop by drop. Each seemed randomly placed about the room,
    and all said something randomly different. Stringer peered at one whose
    case was nothing more than a metal framework. Among its intricacies were
    two pinioned bars, intersecting, which oscillated in a vertical plane,
    first merging into one and then parting like butterfly wings. He moved to
    another where a horizontal beam swung forth and back again. Yet another was
    encased in glass, the first glass Stringer had seen in Ta-tjenen. A little
    ball, smaller than a marble, rolled down a sloping brass plate, its path a
    groove cut like a switchback road into the metal. The ball traveled always
    downward, first in one direction, then hitting a switchback, reversed
    itself in the twinkling of an eye, and continued its descent. When it
    finally reached bottom, the ball struck a little rod, a catch was released,
    the plate flipped up, and the ball began rolling in the new downward
    direction. An escapement mechanism then advanced a notch, and a small hand
    set inside a small circle moved a millimeter. As on all the clocks, there
    were seven scales, some dials, some linear, all unequally calibrated.
  </p>

  <p>
    The Time Keeper passed them off with a wave of his hand. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">They’re all wrong, useless. Hardly a one keeps as good
    time as the sun. There’s hardly a point in having clocks at all if they
    can’t tell me when to come out at Bannkbreak.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane disappeared for a moment into one of the other rooms and returned
    with a reel of wire. Noting Stringer’s surprise, he said, <q ab:speaker="Alhane">From the Junk. Now, I’d thank you if you will come out
    into the rain again with me.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane led stringer out to a windmill that stood near his house. Its giant
    eggbeaters whirled continuously in fury as the wind blew around loose bits
    of fern-moss and houses. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Do you see those two posts
    up there? The little ones jutting out? I’d ask you to attach these two
    wires to them.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer took the wires and climbed up the wet, slippery scaffolding. He
    continuously ducked his head even though he knew that the blades were
    safely above him. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What are you doing?</q> he
    shouted as he dropped down.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">You’ll see even as I do!</q> Alhane scurried off,
    unreeling the twin wires over the muddy path back to his house. When
    Stringer returned inside, Alhane was standing over a tank of water. Two
    wires ran from the tank to a small open box sitting next to it. The box was
    filled with a black substance. The Time Keeper took the two wires that were
    running in from the windmill and placed two fingers across them. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Ouch! Lashgar is with us. Let’s hope the wind keeps
    up.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">A trivially easy wish.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">All right, then…</q> Alhane took one incoming wire
    and tied it to one from the tank. The other he pushed into the box near the
    second wire that was running out of the tank. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Aha! I
    think we have something here! Let’s see if we cannot make it brighter.</q>
    He carefully moved one wire in the box closer to its partner. The water in
    the tank glowed. He moved the wire still nearer, and the water glowed
    brighter and brighter until it lit up the entire room. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Ahahahah! We have light, and not a little of it!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You’ve invented the dynamo?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">The what? I haven’t invented anything. I just copied
    an old rusted thing I found in the Junk a few Patra-Bannks ago and saw what
    it could do.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Is this water in the tank?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">It’s sea water. The process doesn’t work with
    rainwater, so there must be something else here, too.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I don’t think this works with Two-Bit sea
    water. At least I’ve never heard of such a thing.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Well, then this isn’t Two-Bit sea water, is it?
    Evidently we have an added ingredient, another chemical or microorganism,
    perhaps. To be truthful, I haven’t the faintest idea of why it works at
    all—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I don’t, either.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">But you indicated you knew of such devices.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Dynamos? On my world things like that are taken
    for granted—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">What good is taking something for granted?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer laughed. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You’re right. So now what will
    you do with it?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">What will we do with it? After that fire, we need
    all the fuel we can get. This will save all the fuel that normally goes for
    lighting. And the chances of suffocating go down, too. Do you realize how
    hard it is to ventilate the Under, especially with fires burning all over
    the place? We will have to start the installation this moment and no
    later.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Well, good luck, or Lashgar be with you, whichever
    you prefer.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">You won’t help?</q> Alhane asked. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">That’s very curious.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">No. I’m not feeling very generous toward
    Ta-tjenen. I’d rather relax for the next few beclads and collect some
    supplies if I can.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">That is rather self-centered of you.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Yes, it is. But then, I’m not a Tjenen. Good-bye,
    Time Keeper; I hope I see you again sometime.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer left the house and thought he could dimly make out the outline of
    a sun growing large as it neared the horizon. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Moving again, I see,</q> Stringer said aloud. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">When will you learn to slow down? Do you ever hear
    me, Sun?</q> But the Sun just got lost in the thick gray clouds, leaving
    Stringer to wonder if he had seen it at all. A few paces behind him trotted
    Alhane in pursuit.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Come on!</q> Alhane commanded with the curious
    squeak in his voice that appeared whenever he was excited. He grabbed
    Stringer’s arm and pulled him toward the center of town.
  </p>

  <p>
    The plaza was filled with people standing in the heavy rain and wind, and
    more people arrived with every passing clad. Stringer pulled his cloak
    around him more tightly and it tangled in his legs. Alhane pushed him
    through the crowd to the meeting tent until they were inside. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Stay here!</q> he said, disappearing before Stringer
    could argue.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer did not know why he stayed. It was insane to remain here among so
    many enemies. But he did, one hand clenching the hood of his cloak around
    his face and the other resting on the hilt of his kalan.
  </p>

  <p>
    Kenken Wer was there. She had not noticed him. The others of the nestrexam
    gradually arrived, unaware, now that the sundial was useless, of exactly
    when they were expected. Finally the bell was sounded and the last
    stragglers squeezed their way in. Eventually, in the unhurried way of
    Ta-tjenen, things were ready, and a young man and woman came up to Kenken
    Wer, who stood at the Center.
  </p>

  <p>
    Kenken Wer looked at them. <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">So you are Gwyned, my
    third brother’s son’s first nesta.</q> Her raspy voice could hardly be
    heard over the wind and rain pounding on the tent and dribbling through the
    partly blocked apex hole.
  </p>

  <p>
    The girl nodded.
  </p>

  <p>
    Kenken Wer turned to the table that had been set up behind her and spent a
    moment examining some lists. <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">Well, it seems that
    there are no problems. You are both on for at least the first half of the
    Parlztlu, correct?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Gwyned">Yes,</q> the girl answered. <q ab:speaker="Gwyned">Here are the names.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Kenken Wer wiped off a splash of water that had fallen through a leak onto
    the Center and took the piece of paper. <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">Oh, yes, one
    last thing. When do you sleep?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="boy">Hmm,</q> the boy mused. <q ab:speaker="boy">I am
    currently sleeping around the third part of the beclad.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Gwyned">And I the second.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">So we will put you in the two-three section for the
    moment, unless, of course, you want to live separately.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Gwyned">No, we’ll adjust to each other,</q> the girl
    replied.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">And naturally, you can shift sections if you find
    yourself getting out of phase with those around you.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    So, Stringer thought, it looks as if underground Ta-tjenen was divided
    according to people’s sleeping habits. Not a bad idea.
  </p>

  <p>
    Kenken Wer looked up from the newly formed couple. <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">Who’s next?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen stepped forward and Stringer’s knuckles turned white. He stepped
    behind a bystander and hoped she had not noticed him. He could see her
    clearly and was annoyed that she was always so beautiful without trying to
    be. Her hair was heavy with wetness and the drops sprinkled on her
    graskhide jacket.
  </p>

  <p>
     <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">So, Taljen,</q> Kenken Wer remarked, glancing
     at the lists. <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">I see you are going off and will
     be unable to bear children this Parlztlu. What are your plans?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen brushed back her hair with nervous hands. She hesitated, then
    finished her reply in a rush: <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I want…I want the
    Alien.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Kenken Wer cackled. <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">And will you breed with
    him?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The tent was filled with whirring laughter, and Stringer felt numb.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">Besides,</q> Kenken Wer continued, spreading her
    palms, <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">the Alien is finally gone.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen shook her head. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">He is Returned.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">Verlaxchi! That Polkraitz is Returned? Who
    murdered and who caused the fire that ruined us all? He is not dead and you
    want him as nesta?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen stood erect and pulled up her jacket. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Yes,</q> she said expressionlessly.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">Impossible. He must be exposed.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">It is my right to choose anyone because I am going
    off. If you refuse, I will stay Above also when you Go Under. It is that
    simple.</q> Taljen’s voice remained soft, pitch level, little modulation.
  </p>

  <p>
    Kenken Wer shook her fist in rage and turned to the others of the
    nestrexam. <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">This is outrageous!</q> she
    screeched. <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">Is this to be permitted?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Several of the elder bowed their heads together. One finally spoke. <q ab:speaker="elder">Unless we want Taljen dead, we don’t see what can be
    done. It is within her rights. She will have to be responsible for the
    Alien’s actions, of course.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">Ugh!</q> Kenken Wer slammed her fist down on the
    table and bent to the lists. <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">Your child will
    remain with Uslid or be given to another for this Parlztlu, unless, of
    course, you have plans for it, too.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I have no plans.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer could see the tears in Taljen’s eyes as she turned from Kenken Wer
    and made her way through the crowd toward the exit. The Tjenens parted,
    stared as she went, kept their distance. She looked at each in turn as she
    walked by, and it was they who flinched, not she. Finally Stringer lost
    sight of her. He took one look at the great map hanging above him and
    followed her.
  </p>

  <p>
    He didn’t find her until he reached the end of the plaza. She didn’t hear
    him when he called her name. Not until he spun her around with hands
    clasped around her arms did she know he was there.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Taljen…</q> he began as the rain kept coming down
    and the thunder trundled its way across the sky.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Please, Stringer, I don’t want to talk now.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I don’t know why you have done this for me,
    but…I…I want to thank you.…Never…</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen looked at Stringer, the way she always used to, and gazed deeply
    into his eyes. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Don’t be sure, Alien, that I did it
    for you. Now leave me be.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer left her.
  </p>

  <nav><a href="twir_11.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_13.xhtml">Next »</a></nav></body></html>