<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:ab="http://example.org/audiobook-schema" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>The World is Round, Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="twir.css" />
  <link rel="icon" href="icon.svg" />
</head>
<body><nav><a href="twir_1.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_3.xhtml">Next »</a></nav><h2><div>Chapter One</div>Signing On (In the
  Classical Style)</h2>

  <p>
    Stringer was tall and slender, even skinny; that may have been why he was
    called Stringer to begin with. On the other hand, the name may have been no
    more than a Bitter sound, signifying nothing, which we write as
    <q>Stringer.</q> It is not clear which is the case; it is also unclear
    whether it makes any difference whatsoever. So it will be left at that.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer had thin, jet-black hair, the kind that was impossible to keep out
    of his eyes and which made him look perpetually wet, as if he had just come
    in out of the rain. This time, however, he was wet—to the bone—and in the
    rain. It wasn’t a feeling he liked. This time, it was one of those nasty,
    windy nights—too cold for summer—that could convince Stringer his whole
    life was a feeling he didn’t like. The rain was not only cold but green,
    bright like Stringer’s eyes. Green rain, green snow—on the rare instances
    when it came—green eyes against gray-green skin. There must be copper in
    the water. Stringer used to wonder about things like that, but no longer;
    he thought it a waste of time.
  </p>

  <p>
    Pausing for a moment, stooped over as usual, feet ankle-deep in water,
    Stringer turned up the corner of his battered cloak around his neck. He
    delved into his pocket and pulled out the imprinted card that kept track of
    his wages. The numbers glowed, the day’s balance displayed on a thin layer
    of liquid crystal. Not much, he thought, but enough to keep him
    alive. Working as a machinist down in the transport shops was hard only on
    his back. Perhaps he would stick at it another week before moving on to
    something else.
  </p>

  <p>
    The heavy patter of rain continued, not interested in stopping. Stringer
    turned the corner on which he was standing and walked across the street to
    the rail stop. He jostled his way through the crowd closer to the platform
    for a better shot at the next one that came by. The rail arrived a few
    minutes later, already overfilled. It did not come close to stopping, but
    in the moment during which it slowed, Stringer sighted a strap left vacant
    by a disembarking passenger and jumped for it. He caught the strap and hung
    on, precariously tottering over the back trolley. Another potential
    passenger missed his strap and slipped off, perhaps to be crushed by the
    rattling train of wheels. For a brief instant, Stringer felt his body move
    reflexively to help the man, but he stifled the urge and instead laughed to
    himself, as he knew the other passengers were doing.
  </p>

  <p>
    Ten minutes later or so, he released his strap and jumped off. There was no
    paved road here. He splashed along in the mud past shops that were pieced
    together with wood or metal or anything else that would hold them
    up. Glancing over his shoulder, he could see the lights of the skyscrapers
    that dominated the distant skyline. A queer mixture, this town, Pass-Under
    Transhi.
  </p>

  <p>
    The sign glowed <q>Elswer’s,</q> clearly, even in the rain. Stringer
    ducked into the half-open door, pulling it shut behind him. Elswer’s was
    packed that night, probably because of the bad weather. Stringer shook
    himself off on the entrance platform while looking for some familiar
    faces. He saw too many of them. Every vagabond this side of the Transhi
    mountains must be here. He walked slowly down the steps into the main hall,
    almost expecting to trip over a body lying on the stairs.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Filldirt">Stringer, you rat!</q> Stringer lurched forward as
    a sharp slap caught him on the back. <q ab:speaker="Filldirt">Sit with
    us.</q> It was Filldirt. (At least that is a literal—if not
    appropriate—translation of his name.) The only thing Stringer knew about
    Filldirt was that he existed. That was enough. <q ab:speaker="Filldirt">So
    what do you say, Stringer, old man? I haven’t seen you in quite a
    while.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Old man.</q> Stringer nodded. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Give me something to drink.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Filldirt">My pleasure. Give this man some kob!</q> Filldirt
    bellowed to one of the attendants, and a round of drinks was brought
    instantly.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer sat down with his fingers curled around a warm cup. The room was
    large, but with beams so low that you could break your skull on them if you
    weren’t careful. It also smelled. It smelled of bodies, of warm kob, of
    dirt, of all the things with which Stringer lived. The roof, made of tin,
    was rotten and looked as if it would cave in momentarily, but it had always
    looked that way for as long as Stringer knew of the place. And for as long
    as he knew of the place he had never found out who Elswer was. The patrons,
    never sure who was the real one, called all the attendants Elswer, and the
    attendants, all responding to that name, of course, never let on,
    either. Elswer’s. A rattletrap of a flophouse on a rattletrap of a
    planet. (In fact, the name of this planet might be loosely rendered as
    <q>Two-Bit,</q> which adequately reflects the sentiment of the
    inhabitants.)
  </p>

  <p>
    If Filldirt had not called his attention to it, Stringer never would have
    noticed the conversation that was being held in shadow at the next
    table. Three men, partially hidden behind post and beam, were engaged in a
    discussion consisting as much of raised mugs, flailing arms, flashing
    grins, and twinkling eyes as of verbal exchange.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Well, my good man, I’ve had some preliminary tests run
    on your sample, and my guess is that you have something. I may be willing
    to back you if you can be sure of getting to your city.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Hendig">Hendig says he shall get you there, and so I
    shall.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The third man joined in. All Stringer could see of him was a giant beard
    jutting out from behind a post, incredibly muscular arms occasionally
    pounding on the table, and a large gray sack resting near his foot. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">’Tseems to me to find that navigator will be more
    than an unlikely trick, yuh?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Unfortunately true. Not a very poetical solution to
    the problem, but it seems it will have to suffice. What do you say,
    Valyavar?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Sometimes, to be sure, it is difficult to
    distinguish between saints and maniacs. But if it is to be worth six or
    seven years to you, I’m for it. We’ll get a lot of sleep at least.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer could only catch bits and pieces of this conversation, which he
    found indecipherable and not of any great interest, so he stopped paying
    attention and went back to his kob.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Filldirt">So, Stringer,</q> Filldirt said, <q ab:speaker="Filldirt">what do you think of this man Hendig’s story?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer looked up at Filldirt uncomprehendingly. Filldirt was an idiot, and
    Stringer had never liked him. Why they were sitting together he didn’t
    know. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Sorry.</q> He shook his head.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Two-Bit woman 1">You haven’t heard about Hendig, then?</q> a woman
    who was leaning on Filldirt’s shoulder piped up. She had a great deal of
    cosmotron blue on her face. To Stringer it looked hideous. <q ab:speaker="TWo-Bit woman 1">Hendig tells us that he found a new planet around some
    star nearby. I keep forgetting its name.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Barythron,</q> interrupted one of the three men at the
    next table who had stood up to order a drink. He paused and leaned over
    Stringer’s table. <q ab:speaker="Pike">It’s about as far as we’ve gotten
    from here. About ten light-years. A rather interesting tale Hendig has told
    me. He claims to have found a truly amazing city, complete with fabulous
    treasures and mysterious forces. And he tops the whole story off by saying
    the inhabitants don’t even know the city is there. Quite a tale, I’d say,
    my young friend.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer glanced up at the man. He was indeed several—though not many—years
    older than himself, perhaps as tall, perhaps not, but certainly more
    huskily built, and wore a beard trimmed to a point. The scar that ran from
    the corner of his mouth to the corner of left eye indicated a vigorously
    used life. But this scar and the fine lines that crisscrossed the forehead
    could not disguise the bright enthusiasm for that life which the entire
    face radiated. Stringer blew across the mouth of his mug and turned his
    attention to the coarse grain of the wood in the table. He scratched at it
    and a splinter came off in his forefinger. He pulled it out with his
    teeth. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You seem to believe him,</q> he said,
    staring at the splinter of wood he had just extracted.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Ah yes, I do. There is some evidence that Hendig,
    contrary to reputation, has not fabricated the entire tale. And I have not
    told you all of it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Two-Bit woman 1">Hendig says the planet is one hundred times
    the diameter of Two-Bit,</q> said the woman next to Filldirt, a sharp nod
    stamping her confidence.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Two-Bit woman 2">With no nights and days—</q> said a second
    woman.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Two-Bit woman 1">—and you can even stand up.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">What do you say, Stringer?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer took a gulp of kob, swallowing it slowly, thinking over the
    taste. He inclined his head to one side. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Do the
    inhabitants have three heads and five arms?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Filldirt looked uneasy to Stringer, but as Filldirt always looked uneasy,
    Stringer paid no attention and went back to his kob, staring at the little
    bubbles rimming the mug.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">But Hendig swears—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">People also swear that Two-Bit is a fit place to
    live. I never believed them, either.</q> The mug was cracked, Stringer
    noticed, and bubbles tended to collect at the small fissure.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Filldirt">Be careful of what you say, Stringer.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Was that Filldirt again? <q ab:speaker="Stringer">As usual,</q> Stringer
    heard himself say.
  </p>

  <p>
    The second of the three men at the other table rose from behind the post
    and strode over. <q ab:speaker="Hendig">Are you calling me a liar?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer glanced upward and pushed a strand of black hair away from bright
    green eyes. The man was very big, husky, cleanshaven, and craggy. He must
    have stood two meters easily. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Are you Hendig?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Hendig">Yes, so Sarek has brought forth.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Then I suppose I am,</q> Stringer mused, <q ab:speaker="Stringer">calling you a liar.</q> Stringer’s forefinger traced
    the mug’s rim in slow circles.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Filldirt">Watch it, Stringer,</q> Filldirt warned, moving
    away from him. <q ab:speaker="Filldirt">Life is cheap on Two-Bit.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Nothing new, Stringer thought. The only people who lived on Two-Bit were
    dumped there by birth or other accident and couldn’t get off.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Hendig">Look,</q> Hendig said, spitting on the floor. <q ab:speaker="Hendig">Hendig has spent the last six years of his life getting
    to and from that planet.  Friends I left behind grew old without me. You,
    look at you. This one was probably just learning how to stand on his own
    two feet when I left here more than twenty years ago. And since you
    couldn’t have known Hendig then, I would keep your mouth shut.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer shrugged. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I still don’t believe you.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Filldirt">Stringer!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Giving no warning, Hendig slammed Stringer on the shoulder and sent him
    straight into another table. As he struggled to his feet the table
    capsized, scattering wood and ceramic to the floor with a loud
    crash. Milky-white kob, steaming, found its way quickly into the cracks
    between battered planks underfoot. Already a large space had cleared, and
    the room fell quiet.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer straightened, rubbing his elbow. Slowly he cleared his throat. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Is that a challenge?</q> His skinny body looked
    fairly dwarfed by Hendig’s bulk.
  </p>

  <p>
    Hendig grinned in return. <q ab:speaker="Hendig">First I am going to cut
    the hair off your head to within the width of an ant’s eyebrow. Then—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Spare the details.</q> Stringer drew his kalan, a
    fighting knife almost a meter long, very slender, and razor-sharp on three
    sides.  He glanced about him. Not only Hendig but his two companions, the
    first who had spoken about the planet, the second with the great beard, and
    even Filldirt himself now faced him across the room, four kalans unsheathed
    to one. Stringer was satisfied with the odds. After all, life was cheap on
    Two-Bit, including his own.
  </p>

  <p>
    Hendig was rushing him. He moved very fast for his size, Stringer saw, and
    so kept out of the way on the first pass. Then he watched as Hendig’s body
    and his own appeared, as if seen by an independent observer, to slip into
    slow motion. Every nerve in his body was now consciously connected to his
    brain. A millimeter twist of the forefinger, a half-centimeter shift of the
    right leg; all registered. Hendig held the kalan high. Too high for his
    size, thought Stringer in a fraction of a heartbeat. Hendig’s blade is in
    line; he is pressing forward. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Feel the pressure on
    your blade,</q> Stringer’s wrist signaled. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Hendig
    is off balance,</q> the mind decided. This will be easy, just a drop to the
    knee.
  </p>

  <p>
    But no. From the periphery of his eye came the signal that Filldirt was
    lumbering in. A change of strategy is necessary. Head low. Stretch to the
    left; get your left leg out of the way. This should take care of them both.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer felt his hair brush against the floor and his left knee press hard
    against the coarse wood. His knuckle relayed the message of slight
    resistance as he felt his blade penetrate Filldirt’s stomach. The sudden
    force on his outstretched right leg told him that Hendig had tripped over
    his foot.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer spun around, catching Hendig on the flank with the tip of his
    kalan, and jumped up, only to find himself restrained by half a dozen arms
    and his hands locked in the grip of the giant with the great
    beard. Stringer glanced into that giant’s eyes, coal-black and burning. He
    flinched. Even after his body had been released and his hands freed, the
    eyes still held him pinioned, not from the slightest threat of danger or
    physical harm, but from a deep, almost mournful compassion, which Stringer
    could not fathom.
  </p>

  <p>
    Finally Stringer forced himself to turn away. Hendig was sprawled on the
    floor, clasping his wounded flank and glaring up at him. Filldirt’s body
    lay in a growing pool of blood that would fill the cracks between the
    planks and become a nuisance to clean. Stringer looked at the silent crowd
    around him. He hoped they had enjoyed the brawl; it did have the unusual
    element of two opponents almost immediately skewered, one
    permanently. Stringer laughed to himself, ducked under a low beam, and left
    Elswer’s.
  </p>

  <p>
    The rain hadn’t stopped, and it was still chilly. Stringer tucked his cloak
    around his neck and headed up the street. His quick walk turned into a trot
    as he ignored those he slammed into along the way. People were out even in
    the rain. Was there a place on Two-Bit where there weren’t people?
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer stopped abruptly when he felt a tap on his shoulder. He turned
    rapidly, half drawing his kalan.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Hold on, now! No harm meant.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    It was one of those three men at Elswer’s, the one who had spoken of
    Hendig’s planet, the one who had faced him off with the others but
    refrained from entering the fight.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Cold night for a walk, wouldn’t you say?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Nothing better to do.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">I noticed you make friends quickly.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer jerked away.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Now, hold on, fellow; I’m not trying to get you
    angry.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You’re talking about the rehearsal back there?</q>
    Stringer kept walking, his cloak dipping into the puddles with each stride.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Rehearsal?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Practice.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The other man smiled as he caught up with Stringer. <q ab:speaker="Pike">I’ve never seen anyone move so fast.…And you were willing
    to take on four of us—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">One or a hundred, what’s the difference?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Some men, in my estimation, would think
    twice. Especially before tangling with Hendig and Filldirt. You only
    touched Hendig’s kalan once—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">—twice—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">—before you had him. If Filldirt hadn’t rushed in, I
    would now be sorely missing my invaluable colleague. And Filldirt; he was
    good—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">A tyro. He couldn’t handle a kalan to save his
    life.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">I would disagree.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">He’s dead.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Nonetheless—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">The evidence is in my favor.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Humph. As you wish.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">They were slow and forceful. You win by speed and
    agility.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Yes, so it would seem. Where did you learn to fight
    like that?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer pursed his lips. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Everyone on Two-Bit
    knows how to fight. Life’s cheap, remember?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Ah, yes, the planetary slogan. Well, don’t you feel
    anything now that you’ve killed a man?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I’ve killed men before; no doubt I’ll do it
    again—until someone kills me.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">But you didn’t answer the question.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What do I feel? Rehearsed. It was a good
    exercise.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The other turned away, and a light from a nearby window caught his
    half-pursed lips.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer suddenly stopped his brisk walk for the second time. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What do you want?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">I want you to go to Hendig’s World, naturally.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You do?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">He wasn’t lying.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">So?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">That entire <q>rehearsal,</q> as you call it, was a
    waste of your talents. Hendig wasn’t lying, I’m telling you.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">The reason I fought him had nothing to do with his
    lying or not. He challenged me.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">You provoked him.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I was being straightforward and honest, as I am
    with everybody.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Everybody but yourself.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer whirled around with a glare in his eye and a raised fist.  <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Sarek, what do you want, a kalan in your gizzard? I’ll
    be happy to supply—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Now, don’t go nonlinear on me.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer lowered his fist. He had never heard the expression
    <q>nonlinear</q> before, but it made sense. He smiled <q ab:speaker="Stringer"><q>Nonlinear.</q> Where did you get it?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Somewhere or other. I don’t know.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Well, what do you want, anyway?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">I told you: I want you to go to Hendig’s World with
    me.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The rain continued. A drop fell from Stringer’s hood to his cloak and he
    wiped it off.  <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You really believe him, don’t
    you?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Look,</q> the other replied, putting his arm around
    Stringer’s shoulder, <q ab:speaker="Pike">I’ve got something he brought
    back. I’m not sure what it is yet. We’re running tests. But it’s a metal,
    so I’d guess, a ring at that, lighter than magnesium and incredibly
    strong. A plasma torch won’t even touch it. It takes everything we’ve got
    to blast through. I’ve never seen anything like it. And Hendig says there
    is more of the stuff just lying about, as if it had been abandoned all of a
    sudden. Much more, he tells me, as well as other treasures. It’s worth the
    risk, I believe; don’t you?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">That’s all?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Well, when the tests are finished, we can make a final
    decision, but I will tell you frankly that my nose is more accurate than
    any tests. Whatever that material is, it will be worth it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer ducked under a nearby awning to avoid the rain. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I mean, that’s all you want?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">It’s enough, isn’t it? It might also be of interest to
    find out if the place is as big as Hendig said it was. Impossible, of
    course.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer shrugged.  <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I wouldn’t know.</q>
  </p>


  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">You’re a simply marvelous fellow, do you realize that?
    Simply marvelous. Why don’t you come with me to my place? I’ve got
    something to show you.</q> He pulled Stringer out onto the road again and
    they began trotting briskly up the muddy street, past the ramshackle
    dwellings that seemed not merely content to exist but to propagate
    exponentially in such sections of town. When they reached the main road,
    Stringer’s companion punched a call box for a private cab, the two climbed
    in, and the stranger punched for a destination.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">People who use taxis have little need for
    Elswer’s.</q>
  </p>


  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">One goes where business takes him, my young man.…Tell
    me,</q> he continued as he undid his parka, <q ab:speaker="Pike">what’s
    your name, good fellow?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Stringer.</q>
  </p>


  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Ah, yes, I had forgotten. Friends call me Pike. Good
    enough?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Okay.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike laughed.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What’s wrong?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Nothing at all, nothing at all.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The taxi stopped after about twenty minutes. With a flick of the wrist Pike
    popped his credit card into the tabulator, lifted on his hood again, and
    was once more out into the rain. Stringer followed in like manner and found
    himself standing next to the shadowy form of a tall building. He had seen
    it many times before. It was the headquarters of the Two-Bit Transportation
    Corporation.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer shrugged and followed Pike into the elevator shaft. A door opened;
    it closed and opened again. The apartment that faced them was unlike any
    Stringer had ever recalled. The thick draperies that hung suspended from
    ceiling to floor were characteristic of the entire room. A fireplace
    occupied one corner of a sunken pit in the center. The blue and green
    couches blended into the carpet almost indistinguishably. The whole gave
    Stringer an indescribable sensation, one that combined the desire to sleep,
    to retch, and the strong feeling that he was in the wrong place.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">This belongs to you?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Stringer, that’s very clever of you to guess,
    indeed. Care for a drink?</q> Pike produced two mugs from an alabaster
    cabinet and filled them, offering one to Stringer. Stringer shook his head
    at the extended hand.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Do you own the whole corporation?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">As much as any one person owns it. Why don’t you take
    off your cloak? It’s dry in here, you know. You can even sit down if you
    want.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I’ll sit down.</q> Stringer left his cloak. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What did you want to show me?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Oh, yes, that. Come.</q> Pike crossed to the other
    side of the room. The heavy curtains parted at the push of a button.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer stood up, felt dizzy, and shook his head. Stand up, he told
    himself.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">What’s wrong?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Nothing.</q> Then Stringer looked directly into
    Pike’s eyes. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Do you ever feel, at night, somebody
    is trying to talk to you, pull you apart in all directions; some part of
    your mind, way down, like a nightmare that is part of yourself?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike took a step backward. <q ab:speaker="Pike">No, never. Some of us are
    in control of our faculties.…Well, come and take a look.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer walked over and peered out the window. It was a long way
    down. Although it was dark, strong lights cut through the night to
    illuminate a runway and some low-lying hangars off to one side. There were
    several ships on the field, needle-sharp noses and swept-back wings
    gleaming in the rain.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">You see, those are just the shuttles. The big ships
    are up there.</q> Pike lifted his eyes skyward. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Interstellar travel will soon become big business, I
    hope. It’s time for Two-Bit to start branching out. We’ve used up this
    solar system and a few others. If you don’t believe me, I can take you for
    a ride up.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Okay, now what do you want?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Stringer, for an obviously intelligent man, you are
    not acting very brightly. I’ve told you several times already that I want
    you to come with me to Hendig’s World.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What makes you think I’m so intelligent?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">People who talk like you are either very stupid, with
    nothing in their heads, or very intelligent and have something to hide. I
    suspect you are in the latter category. Tell me, do you know how to
    read?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Occasionally.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Occasionally?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I try to avoid it. Reading confuses, slows down
    thinking.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Speed and deception, is that it?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Why do you care?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">You don’t think you’d like a drink?</q> Pike held out
    his hand again. Stringer shook his head a second time. <q ab:speaker="Pike">I don’t want any uneducated bumpkins on this trip. If you
    are intelligent, you can be trained to think, and if you are quick—as you
    amply demonstrated—you can be even more useful. We may be going to a very
    dangerous place. Clear enough? Besides, I think you’d get along well with
    the rest of the crew I have chosen.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Who are they?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">You’ve met them. Hendig, for one—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer laughed and turned away. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You’ve got to be
    kidding.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">—and Valyavar, for another.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Who?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">The big man with the beard.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer whirled around and stepped toward the door. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I told you, I’m not going.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">You’ve said nothing of the sort. Tell me, are you good
    with machines?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">If anything.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Electronics? Mechanics?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Odd jobs here and there. Mindless. I try to avoid
    permanence.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Speed and deception again?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">If you like.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Do you know how to write?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer chuckled. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">My name, at least.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike smiled. <q ab:speaker="Pike">You can’t be too sure these days. I don’t
    know what’s happening to the world. People don’t read and write any
    more.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Who needs to?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">One always needs to. Well, shall we begin?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer shook his head a final time. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You are very
    sure that I am going with you, aren’t you?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike laughed, almost guffawed. Then he looked Stringer straight in the
    eye. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Yes, I am quite sure.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer put up his hood and walked to the elevator. Just as it opened for
    him, he turned around, lowered his hood again, and gazed back at Pike. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">All right, I’ll go. But just remember one thing,
    quite straight: I don’t like you much.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike grinned. <q ab:speaker="Pike">My good fellow, that’s fine by me. I ask
    you only to remember one thing in return.…</q> Then Pike’s grin turned into
    a frown. <q ab:speaker="Pike">It is not wise to argue with me.…Now, shall we
    get to work?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    This time Stringer nodded, and that was that.
  </p>

  <nav><a href="twir_1.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_3.xhtml">Next »</a></nav></body></html>