<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:ab="http://example.org/audiobook-schema" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>The World is Round, Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="twir.css" />
  <link rel="icon" href="icon.svg" />
</head>
<body><nav><a href="twir_9.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown-top" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown-top&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_11.xhtml">Next »</a></nav><h2><div>Chapter Nine</div>Dialogue on Two World
  Systems</h2>

  <p>
    This was the Weird Bannk, the shortest of all the Bannks, with the shortest
    of all the teclads and those growing shorter still. The sun, never above
    shoulder height this Bannk, was now sinking fast toward the horizon. After
    three months of failing to climb even halfway to the zenith, the
    snail-paced orb had decided to retreat quickly, unhesitatingly,
    monotonically toward the Patra. The temperature of the air in those
    slanting rays followed the curve of the sun, falling with it now, quickly,
    also unhesitatingly, monotonically toward the Patra.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer was sure that the sun was now moving so fast that night would come
    at any moment. For a second he cursed his imagination, wishing time would
    fly and carry his life nearer to its end; then he forced himself to
    concentrate on what to do next.
  </p>

  <p>
    He set about collecting wood for a fire. He wasn’t sure if he needed one
    yet, but Pike had told him that it was the first thing you did when
    stranded. He ignited the wood with his graser and basked in the added heat
    of the faintly visible daylight flames.
  </p>

  <p>
    He heard a rustle behind him and swiveled around just in time to see a
    small two-legged sauropod scurrying into the woods. He ran after it,
    tripped twice, and cut his arm. He finally caught up with the animal as it
    ducked into a hole in the ground. It shrieked as he killed it with a quick
    blast. Then he felt around in the hole. He couldn’t reach to the bottom but
    imagined that it was deeper than the Patra. No wonder, then, that he had
    seen only small animals, except for the grask, brought by the Polkraitz
    themselves. Burrow under for the Patra. Save yourself. Stringer didn’t
    think he could fit into the hole, so he stood up and headed back into the
    woods.
  </p>

  <p>
    At the fire, Stringer opened the plastic sack that, thankfully, Benjfold
    had thrown overboard and took out his knife. He began cutting up his catch,
    whose skin smelled strongly of glycerol, into small portions. That done, he
    emptied the sack onto the ground and mounted the bag itself on a tall
    pod-tree branch. If he were lucky, somebody would come by within a
    Patra-Bannk or two and see his frozen body as well as his distress
    signal. Glintz, clearly, was too far to walk to; there was not even a
    chance of his getting there. Would the insulated plastic tent last the
    Patra? Stringer laughed.
  </p>

  <p>
    He finished his dinner, sighed, and glanced at the contents of his sack
    scattered over the ground. He picked up his rodoft, hardly damp thanks to
    the waterproof bag, and began picking at the strings. A dull twang released
    itself. Stringer found the bow lying across his kalan, picked it up, and
    dragged it across the strings. A squawk and a screech pierced the air. He
    sighed again and spread out a fingering chart Uslid had given him. He began
    to sort out the notes, testing the sound at each placement of his
    fingers. That was better. A thirty-one-tone scale. The Tjenens had already
    demonstrated the flexibility of their voices with their sing-song language;
    their ears must be equally sensitive, if not more so, to distinguish the
    close-packed frequencies of the subtle scale. And as another
    <em>screeeech</em> emerged from the sounding gourd, Stringer was sure that
    he would never master it.
  </p>

  <p>
    For hours or telclads, Stringer sat on the beach playing the rodoft. He set
    up the tent, searched for shelter and more food, then went back to playing
    in the open under the cloud-filled sky. That was all he wanted to do. He
    glanced across the water at the dim outline of the sun. The sun was
    laughing at him for sure.
  </p>

  <p>
    The water lapping around his ankle made Stringer conscious of something he
    had noticed on the trip south and earlier on the beach. The impression that
    had continually impinged on his retina and immediately evaporated could now
    be verbalized: the ocean was experiencing tides. Even with the waves, that
    was clear; every few hours the water would creep up on the beach, then
    recede.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer looked up into the sky. But Patra-Bannk had no moon; at least he
    hadn’t seen one. Every child knew that tides were produced by the moon. Or
    by the sun. Stringer thought for a moment. No, he didn’t think the sun
    explained anything, either. Patra-Bannk rotated so slowly that he doubted
    solar tides would be so easily noticed. So Stringer reasoned against the
    tides and decided he was seeing some other long-term wave phenomenon. At
    least that explanation had the advantage of being untestable, whereas his
    tide theory seemed to be disproved.
  </p>

  <p>
    After watching the water recede, Stringer searched a new area for
    shelter. Finding none, he returned to the beach. The wind wrapped his cowl
    around his neck and distorted the sounds of his rodoft. The wind was not
    always south any more, but was beginning to gust and veer, changing
    direction at whim. Stringer could taste the forest fire moving closer,
    borne on that wind, and he remembered that his was not the only life in
    danger.
  </p>

  <p>
    As he sat there bowing the rodoft, he felt the first drops of rain whipping
    into his face. It had rained once or twice at Ta-tjenen, but now it was
    late Bannk, so this must be the start of the late-Bannk rains that Taljen
    has mentioned. Bad weather was on its way, and the bad weather would not
    let us before Bannk’s end. Stringer went back to his instrument.
  </p>

  <p>
    He wasn’t sure what made him look up at the precise instant that he did,
    but he was sure that if he hadn’t, it would have been too late. Oars
    dipping into the water, a ship was making its way north, straining against
    both wind and waves. Stringer jumped up and shouted:
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Here! Here!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    He plucked his bag from the pod-tree and waved it high above his head. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Here! Can you see me?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The ship wasn’t far off shore and Stringer was quickly spotted. In a few
    minutes, after some trouble in the surf, the craft had beached
    itself. Stringer gathered up his things and ran to the small vessel.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="oarsman">This is a strange place to be near Bannk’s end,</q>
    said one of the oarsmen as he helped Stringer over the edge.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">It’s a strange place to be at any time,</q>
    Stringer answered.
  </p>

  <p>
    The oarsman was tall and dark, with face almost the same shade as
    hair. Stringer knew what that meant.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="oarsman">You speak with an accent. Where are you from?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Far away…very far away. Tell me where you are
    going.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="oarsman">Back to the Center. Where else is there to go?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer nodded heavily, and the boat once again took to the water. They
    tacked the coast, angling in and out like a sewing needle, doing their best
    to avoid sailing into the wind. It was a long process, and the ten oarsmen
    did not seem to help greatly.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer watched the sail for a moment and then stretched out on the
    deck. He slept soundly for the first time since the start of the fire. He
    was awakened by heavier drops of rain falling on his face than those he had
    felt before. He got up and turned to the cabin.
  </p>

  <p>
    
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="oarsman">You can’t go down there,</q> said the same oarsman.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Why not?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="oarsman">The Time Keeper is hard at work.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer balked, but only for a moment. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I think he
    would like to see me.</q> He pushed the other aside and opened the cabin
    door. Two or three steps down, he entered a room that was cluttered with
    parchment lying on the floor and scattered over the single desk. On that
    desk was a blank white ball with some black marks scribbled over its
    surface.
  </p>

  <p>
    A short little man with silvery hair and very black eyes paced the cabin,
    kicking up the papers with his shuffle.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Come in! Come in! I thank you. Who are you? Come
    in!</q> the man continually exclaimed with a squeak in his voice.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer stepped forward. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">My name is Stringer.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">You are not from Ta-tjenen or Glintz, no, that is
    obvious.</q> The silver-haired man studied Stringer closely.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">No, I’m not.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Good, then maybe you will listen to me. I have made
    a great discovery. The results are here. I have made runs in previous
    Bannks, but no one listens. So I did it again and again. I still have to
    compare these figures with those taken at Ta-tjenen this Mid-Bannk. But I
    am sure—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What have you found out?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">The world is round!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Spherical? Like a ball?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Precisely as this one here. Isn’t that exciting?</q>
    The little man chuckled in obvious delight.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer leaned against the wall and sighed. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I
    thought I was mad when I told Taljen and she wouldn’t believe me.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">You <em>know</em> already?</q> The silver-haired
    man’s voice betrayed disappointment.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer nodded. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I am not from this world but
    another. I knew already. But don’t worry, the discovery is still yours.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The older man smiled. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I thank you. An Alien, that is
    interesting. Polkraitz?</q> He studied Stringer closely again.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Do I look like one?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I wouldn’t know. But you say you have talked to
    Taljen?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You know her?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Yes, of course—very well, in fact. Who in Ta-tjenen
    doesn’t know her?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">That seems to be true.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">But she was my assistant also and should have been
    taking measurements for me while I was gone. Was she?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I don’t know. She may have been. For the first
    teclad I was there, I was not very conscious of what she was doing. You
    mentioned Mid-Bannk. I arrived after that, about a teclad after, I
    think. But it is good to know that I am not crazy. How stupid can Ta-tjenen
    be, not to realize that the world is a ball? Taljen just couldn’t believe
    me—or you, I guess.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">This has been a standing argument between us and has
    gotten to the point where she doesn’t like to talk about it at all. But, I
    ask you, why should Taljen believe you or me? She is a bright girl and
    believes what she sees. Why should she listen to us? If you lived on this
    planet all your life, what would make you believe it wasn’t flat?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer gave his standard answer: <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Ships on my
    world gradually sink below the horizon. That wouldn’t happen on a flat
    world. They would fall off and suddenly disappear.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">True. But do you think you could see this ship on
    the horizon? Not unless you had eyes like a solofar. We usually don’t
    travel that far, anyway.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Why not?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Where is there to go but fishing? Glintz is the
    closest town to Ta-tjenen, and that is almost two thousand kilometers, and
    we have just come from Godrhan, the next town, twice as far as
    that. Besides, the Bannks are hot and the wind is usually south. Sailing
    back north is cumbersome; that is why we tried coming back now, when the
    wind shifts to the south-east. However, I see we may have waited too
    long.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Hasn’t anyone sailed around the world?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Stringer,</q> the silver-haired man chuckled, <q ab:speaker="Alhane">are you serious? With the heat of Mid-Bannk and the
    Patra, and the size—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Yes, I suppose that was silly. I had
    forgotten. Didn’t your Polkraitz leave any records? Maps?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Not that I know of. Any more questions?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Hmmm.</q> Stringer thought for a moment. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Once somebody told me that you can see the roundness
    of other planets and the—</q> For the first time Stringer realized that the
    Tjenens had no word for <q>moon.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Do you see any other planets?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Well,</q> sighed Stringer, <q ab:speaker="Stringer">it looks as if the right thing to ask is, why do you
    believe the world is round?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">A good question, and it took me a long time to be
    convinced of it, I’ll not tell you wrongly. I’ll show you the first
    evidence that got me thinking.</q> The old man ducked under the table and
    brushed away some of the parchments lying about, to reveal a metal box
    about half a meter long, handsomely made of brass or something very
    similar. He motioned Stringer to the door, and they went above, taking the
    box with them.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Ah, it’s raining, and the sun has begun to put on
    fur. But it isn’t fully clothed yet, for the moment, and we might still see
    something. Look here.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer peered through the hole that was cut into one side of the box and
    saw an image of the cloud-streaked sun projected along an inner wall.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Do you see those little black specks on the sun?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer nodded, barely making out a single sun-spot.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I keep a record of their positions. They travel
    across the sun. The bigger ones I can see get distorted, disappear around
    the edge, and in less than an average teclad come around to the other
    side. The sun, at least, acts like a ball, don’t you think?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer thought that was clever. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Do you have any
    other evidence?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Yes,</q> said the little man with that curious
    squeak in his voice. <q ab:speaker="Alhane" class="no-close-quote">After all, I
    thought that if the sun was a ball, maybe the world was too. But I couldn’t
    figure out a way of testing that, and my head ran itself around in
    circles. Finally, one beclad in the market, I spotted my own shadow being
    cast on a rather large melon. The shadows were the key, it came to me in
    that instant. But that was only the beginning. After beclads of
    excruciating thought—and this I can’t underestimate—I eventually decided
    that if the world was flat and the sun traveling above it, then the sun’s
    rays would strike the ground at the same angle whether you were north or
    south. Indeed, this requires the assumption that the sun is small and far
    away and that the rays can be considered parallel. You might object that I
    have no justification for making that assumption unless I know how far away
    the sun is—which I don’t—and I would say you’re right. Nonetheless, it was
    the simplest assumption to make—I would agree with that myself, and
    somebannk when all the answers are in, I am sure I will be borne out.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane" class="no-close-quote">On the other hand, and under the
    same assumption, if the world was curved then the angle of the sun would
    change depending on where you were. It took me a long time to figure that
    out; after all, I’m no geometer, am I not? My father was more the
    mathematical type but I hate the stuff. Does it, I ask you, give you any
    feel for real things? Have you ever seen a perfect triangle in nature? Or a
    semi-infinite half plane? Geometry is really very fictitious, especially if
    the world truly is a ball. In that case, I ask you further, does it make
    any sense to talk about plane geometry at all? Certainly not. You can’t
    make real triangles on a sphere. Whoever invented plane geometry was living
    in a world of his own.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Anyway, not to digress, this was all four or five
    Bannks ago. What I did then was to take two big rods like so</q>—the Time
    Keeper held his arms outstretched—<q ab:speaker="Alhane" class="no-close-quote">and go out onto the beach with an assistant. We planted
    the first rod in the sand, making sure that it was quite straight, and then
    I ran down the beach with the second rod, doing the same thing. At my
    signal we both measured the length of the shadow cast by the sun. To my
    profound disappointment, I’ll be truthful on that, we saw no difference in
    the lengths of the shadows. Absolutely none. At first I thought that the
    world was surely flat but, after some thought, I decided to try bigger
    poles. We repeated the experiment, hoping that taller posts would make the
    difference in shadow lengths easier to see. The only result was that I got
    tired from running up and down the beach. Finally, and this was a curious
    thought, I conjectured that perhaps the world was bigger than I had
    expected, and so I sailed down the coast for a few dozens of kilometers. We
    thought we could trust our clocks for that short amount of time to make
    sure we took the readings at the same instant, although, on afterthought,
    that turned out not to be so crucial; the sun does move very slowly, as you
    can see. So we did it. Again nothing. There was absolutely nothing.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane" class="no-close-quote">By this time, you can be sure that
    I was about to give up the whole project. However, I was possessed by the
    idea and vowed to go all the way to Glintz the next Bannk. Now, I shan’t
    tell you falsely that no one ever goes to Glintz, especially just to
    measure shadows. So I got a number of rods—taking many poles and averaging
    data would offer more reasonable results, don’t you agree?—and left some
    behind at Ta-tjenen and sailed south to Glintz. Because our clocks wouldn’t
    be useful after such a journey, we were especially careful to get there
    before Mid-Bannk, when we would take most of the readings. When we got back
    to Ta-tjenen, my assistants and I compared measurements. Once again I felt
    my heart freezing, because the first readings taken on the way south showed
    nothing definite. Oh, there were small differences in shadow lengths,
    hardly readable, I tell you, but some showed the longer shadow on the
    northern pole and some showed it on the southern. And I’m afraid it can’t
    be both at once, whether the world is flat or round.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Finally we reached the measurements taken at Glintz
    itself. Again, on the shorter poles where reading anything is difficult,
    only small random fluctuations showed up. At last, on most of the taller
    poles we got results that were big enough to be read, and some of those
    agreed as closely as might be expected. It wasn’t much to go on, but enough
    to convince me. It convinced no one else, I can tell you that.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Why not?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane" class="no-close-quote">Ah, Stringer Not of Ta-tjenen,
    when I got my results back and showed them around, people said, <q>Why,
    that’s only a few centimeters’ difference in the length of a shadow, not
    even a finger’s length. And if your measurements were not made at the same
    time, then everything is meaningless. And of course, you have no way of
    telling that the measurements were made at the same time.</q></q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane" class="no-close-quote">And I replied, <q>No, you’re quite
    wrong. That’s why we took lots of measurements at Mid-Bannk, when the sun
    was moving the slowest—and that is very slow indeed. Certainly, by taking
    measurements every few belclads, we could be sure to find the shortest
    shadow, even through the haze if we were lucky, indicating that the
    measurement was taken precisely at Mid-Bannk.</q> And then I went on to
    explain that we wanted <em>local</em> Mid-Bannk wherever we were, be it
    Glintz or Ta-tjenen, and it didn’t matter if the two towns were directly
    north or south, which would make the Mid-Bannks at the same time. This went
    totally over their heads, and I gave up trying to explain it to them.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane" class="no-close-quote">Still, they wouldn’t be
    silenced. <q>And how do you know how far it is to Glintz?</q> they
    asked. <q>You can’t measure the distance with a ruler; you can only guess
    at it from your travel times and estimated speeds. What if you’re
    wrong?</q></q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane" class="no-close-quote"><q>That,</q> I replied, <q>would
    only change the size of the world and not the shape, so your objection is
    irrelevant.</q></q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">No sooner had I made this devastating rebuttal than
    they raised the objection that the measuring pole had to be perfectly
    vertical or the results would be wrong. Was that ever dirt in the eyes!
    When I calculated the error that a slightly tilted pole would cause, and
    estimated the accuracy with which I could make a pole vertical by eye, I
    realized that the experiment was at best questionable, at worst totally
    useless. In fact, I am sure those random readings and wholesale
    disagreements I spoke of were caused by just this phenomenon: poles tilting
    in the wind. What is even sadder, it seems that by increasing the height of
    the pole to make reading the results easier, one just increases the error
    by the same percentage. So tall poles do not decrease the error, only
    enlarge it along with the <q>true</q> result. Thus, my tall-pole readings
    at Glintz may have simply made my readings of a systematic error more
    accurate, and the world could still be flat.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer could only shake his head now, not in derision, but in the
    realization that he would have given up long before then.
  </p>

  <p>
    The Time Keeper continued: <q ab:speaker="Alhane" class="no-close-quote">I
    resolved to go back to Glintz the next Bannk with better apparatus, which I
    did, making sure that the poles were perfectly vertical, which, to be sure,
    is no mean feat in the wind. To my great and overwhelming satisfaction, I
    got the same results, or close enough. Still, the same objections were
    raised when I returned. After all, would you change the shape of the world
    because one shadow is half a finger longer than another two thousand
    kilometers away?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Well, at this point, I sent a ship out onto the
    ocean and watched it all the while with my telescope, hoping to see it
    sink, which, as you suggest, occurs on your world. I wanted to show the
    others that proof, too. But after looking and seeing little more than a
    blur—and that only if I was being optimistic—I knew I wasn’t going to
    convince anybody.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">And yet you still believed?</q> Stringer asked in
    admiration.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I did begin to doubt my results again, especially
    when I used them to compute the size of Patra-Bannk. It’s two million
    kilometers around! How could I believe it? You ask about sailing around the
    world—and I tried to measure shadows running up and down the beach! What a
    comedy of errors!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">But you’re right,</q> said Stringer softly.
    However, the old man didn’t hear.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">So,</q> the other went on, sighing, <q ab:speaker="Alhane">nobody believed me and I hardly did, either. When I
    suggested that my theory predicted that the sun would look higher in the
    south and therefore the south should be hotter than Ta-tjenen, just as the
    Long Bannk is hotter than the Short, everyone laughed. That’s when I
    decided to take an expedition to Godrhan, which, as I’ve said, is more than
    twice as far as Glintz. And the angle so measured is more than twice as big
    as the ones I have measured before. I’ll bet on that without having seen the
    latest data from Ta-tjenen. Furthermore, as the sun is lowest this Bannk,
    the error due to any pole tilt will be lessened, I will so argue.</q> He
    paused for a very long time. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Maybe Ta-tjenen will
    believe me now, maybe they won’t. It’s a few questionable shadows versus
    the obvious.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Would you go past Godrhan to get more of a change
    in the shadows? That might convince them.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The Time Keeper started involuntarily. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">But beyond
    Godrhan is the Edge of the World.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer eyed him closely, and under his scrutiny the Time Keeper chuckled,
    perhaps a little nervously.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Does it really matter to Ta-tjenen whether the world
    is flat or round? Ta-tjenen is its own world; it has to be by necessity,
    and no one can blame them for that. Perhaps somebannk it will be different,
    but I doubt it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer laughed at the matter-of-factness of the last statement. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">If it makes you feel any better, you’re right.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The silver-haired man shrugged. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I knew I was.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Tell me,</q> Stringer said, drenched, back into
    the cabin, <q ab:speaker="Stringer">why do they call you the Time
    Keeper?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Because that’s supposed to be my job. It was passed
    on to me over generations. All the previous Time Keepers had the regimen
    worked out fairly well, so all I had to do was learn it. It isn’t much of a
    job any more, not unless I can discover a better way of keeping time. And
    you can be sure I haven’t been able to do that.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">But I don’t understand why anyone has to do
    it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">How else would you keep track of how long the Bannk
    is?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">But can’t you do that by looking at the big
    sundial?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">And how good is that? Better than most of the
    clocks, actually. But who is to say which Bannk we are on?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I’ve heard they change.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Most certainly! This is the Weird Bannk, so called
    because, as you have seen, the sun travels almost horizontally across the
    sky, hardly up at all, and even the sunset seems too long—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Not long enough!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">It is the shortest of all the Bannks, and the
    temperature is pleasant.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">It is?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">You saw the sun this Bannk? A trifle. It never finds
    its way into the sky. Wait ’til next Bannk, the Killer Bannk, which is the
    longest of all, and, I’ll not tell you wrongly, the sun climbs twice as
    high as in this Bannk. The teclads are long and almost all activity
    stops. But before then is a Short Patra, longer than this Bannk, coming
    shortly, as you can see—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Yes, I can.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">The Killer Bannk is followed by another Short Patra,
    which is in turn followed by another Weird Bannk. After the Weird Bannk we
    have a Long Patra and a Long Bannk, each as long as the other but not as
    long as the Killer Bannk. Following the Long Bannk is a Weird Patra, so
    called because it is as long—or as short—as the Weird Bannk, thus making it
    the shortest of all the Patras. On its heels comes the first of the Short
    Bannks, which is not as long as the Long Bannk but is longer than the Weird
    Bannk—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Why do you call it the Short Bannk if it is
    not?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Because the shortest Bannk already has another name:
    the Weird Bannk. If we changed it, then we would have to find another name
    for the Short Bannk. But to continue—the Short Bannk is followed by the
    Deep Freeze, equally as long as the Killer Bannk. The Deep Freeze precedes
    another Short Bannk, as short—or as long—as a Short Patra, which is
    followed consecutively by a Weird Patra, a Long Bannk, a Long Patra, and
    then the cycle starts all over again with the Weird Bannk after seven
    Bannks and seven Patras. So the sundial must keep track of seven Bannks,
    and we have not even discussed what to do in the Patra.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">If there are seven Bannks to keep track of, then
    how come the sundial only shows four scales? I should think there would be
    seven.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">If you were counting, there are only four different
    types of Patras and Bannks, although the cycle is seven Patra-Bannks
    long.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">How long is a Patra-Bannk, if they’re all
    different?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Either that question is meaningless or the answer is
    obvious. But let’s not digress. We are talking about the Time Keeper. Of
    course, my duties don’t stop with just deciding which Bannk we are on,
    which the sundial does, anyway. There is the Golun calendar as well, and, I
    ask you, what about the Parlztlu? Of course, there is the additional task
    of keeping track of how long the beclad is at any given time—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">How long a beclad is? Do you mean all the units
    change?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">No,</q> the Time Keeper replied. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">The clad itself, which goes by in the flap of a
    solofar, is too short to bother changing, as is the belclad. But telclads,
    beclads, and teclads all change noticeably. Telclads only on the best
    clocks. Otherwise—or even in that case—the error usually swamps the actual
    change. So beclads and teclads remain to worry about.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">But how can the larger units change and not the
    smaller?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">If you change a large unit—make it larger, for
    instance—then I’d say you can either increase the small units
    proportionally or just put in more of the small units into the large.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What if they don’t fit?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Do you mean, what if there’s not an integral
    number?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Right.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">As I’ve said, the clad is quite small, so there is
    always an integral number in, say, even a telclad.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Not theoretically.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I’m not talking about theory, am I?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">That sounds like cheating to me.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">No, it’s just a matter of how accurately we want to
    bother defining the units. I quantize them. That makes it easy, I’ll say
    truthfully.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">If that makes it easy, why bother with any of
    this?</q> Stringer asked, throwing up his arms. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What good can changing the units do?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Well, let’s think about it, should we not?
    Obviously, the Bannks and Patras all differ greatly in a highly
    asymmetrical fashion, and it is hard to remember exactly how—as you’ve just
    seen. Time between Mid-bannk and sunset varies between each Bannk as well
    as from sunrise to Mid-bannk. But what Ta-tjenen is interested in is simply
    when to come Above and when to go Under. So it is just as easy to keep
    everything nice and even, let’s say six teclads for each Bannk and each
    Patra. I think that’s reasonable.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Okay, then you have to change the size of the unit
    from Bannk to Patra. That seems fairly reasonable, even though on my world
    I’ve never heard of such a thing. But to change them during the Bannk seems
    absolutely outrageous.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Well, I suppose that depends on how you define a
    teclad, don’t you think? We define it as the time it takes the sun to move
    one-third of the way up or down the sky. And of course that changes. You
    see the sun move quickly at first, then slow down as it approaches its
    maximum, and then speed up again on its way back down.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What a ridiculous system! No wonder no one in
    Ta-tjenen ever knows what time it is!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">How would <em>you</em> define a teclad?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Why not just a sixth of a given Bannk?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">And how do you determine how long <em>that</em> is?
    With bad clocks, it’s easier to measure the angle of the sun. But, in
    concession to your views, I was toying with the idea of keeping the teclad
    constant and changing the angle in the sky which the sun moves during its
    traversal. However, that bothered me a little.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I should hope so.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">It does seem that the size of an angle should remain
    fixed.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Why not the size of a beclad or a teclad? Are they
    any less real?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">As I’ve asked you before, how do you define these
    terms? Not only is it hard to conceive of what a teclad might be, once
    that’s decided, but it is hard enough to measure, so you might as well
    change it if we need to. I admit, though, I balked at changing the angle in
    the sky.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I’m at least glad for that.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">At any rate, no matter what system you use, or what
    system I use, building a clock that keeps good time on Patra-Bannk is
    difficult; there is so little to check it with, especially during the
    Patra, when there is nothing to check it with. I do have one of our best
    here.…</q> The silver-haired man opened a cabinet door, and Stringer saw a
    beautiful device that had seven large dials and two smaller ones. The
    calibrations, like those on the sundial at Ta-tjenen, were uneven on the
    seven larger scales. The whole was mounted in brass and inlaid with
    polished gems.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Why are there seven scales here and only four for
    the sundial?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">If you remember, there are only four different types
    of Bannks and Patras, as I told you, but the cycle is seven Patra-Bannks
    long. This clock counts them separately.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">So why does the sundial have only four?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Why do you see with your eyes? Because a shadow
    can’t tell the difference between two Bannks that are the same, that’s
    why. My grandfather built this, or my grandmother, I’m not sure which,
    although I’m told that the jewels are from the Polkraitz themselves. We
    have few enough now.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Tell me one more thing: What is the Golun-Patra?
    It keeps following me around and I don’t think I like it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">The Golun-Patra occurs once every ninety-seven
    Patra-Bannks.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Why is that?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Because the Golun is ninety-seven beclads long,
    whereas the Patra-Bannk is one hundred forty-four.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer shook his head. How Tjenens always answered the wrong question! <q ab:speaker="Stringer">But what is a Golun and why is it ninety-seven
    beclads?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The elder man scratched his head. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Well, the Golun is
    one-third of a Parlztlu, why I can’t say exactly. But if you start off the
    Golun and Patra-Bannk together, they don’t coincide again for another
    ninety-seven Patra-Bannks, one Golun-Patra. This is the twelfth Golun-Patra
    since the revolt, a special anniversary because it is the twelfth.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">And does it have something to do with the return
    of the Polkraitz?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I don’t know. Does it have anything to do with
    that?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer stood up angrily. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Sarek or
    Verlaxchi—whichever is in charge around here! That old woman Kenken Wer,
    who tried to kill me, and most of Ta-tjenen seem to think it does.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Kenken Wer, yes. The Great Cackler. Well, I can’t
    speak for her.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer gritted his teeth and threw up his arms once more. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I think I need some more fresh air.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer went above and stood in the rain. It was, even now, heavier than
    when he was last on deck. The boat was approaching a part of the coast
    where the great fire had done its work, and the damage was clear to
    see. The forest, not dense to begin with, was scattered with burned-out
    stumps and charred fern-moss. It wasn’t a pleasant sight, but one that went
    well with this planet.
  </p>

  <p>
    The Time Keeper then noticed the forest. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Verlaxchi!
    What happened?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">There was a great fire just before the rains. Most
    of the forest is in ruins. You will not be returning to a happy city, Time
    Keeper.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Do you know if there is fuel enough?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">For this Patra, at least, I was told. If I were
    Ta-tjenen, I would start being like most worlds and begin using oil.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Oil? Certainly there isn’t enough oil in all the
    grask in Ta-tjenen to do that.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">No, I mean oil from the ground.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I’ve never heard of any of that.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Curious maybe, maybe not. But then there seem to
    be a few curious things about this planet. The gravity, for instance.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Humph. I never could understand it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Neither could I, but something is certainly wrong
    on Patra-Bannk.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The old man’s eyes lit up. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Really? The world is
    always much more interesting when something is wrong with it. Tell me.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Let me get it straight. I think I finally
    remembered the exact expression. The weight of an object on a planet is
    proportional to the mass of the planet divided by the radius squared—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Amazing! Is it always true? Everywhere?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Yes, as far as I know.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Incredible! Go on! Go on! Aha…</q> The little man
    went dancing around the deck in the rain, falling several times as the boat
    pitched.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Now, see if I make sense. On my planet, which is
    about one-fiftieth the diameter of this one, I weigh about the same as I do
    here—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I see! That means the mass of Patra-Bannk is about
    twenty-five hundred times that of your world.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer was glad to be talking to someone who understood him. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">But don’t you see how ridiculous that is? The volume
    of Patra-Bannk is one hundred twenty thousand times that of my world, so
    the mass can’t be twenty-five hundred times that of my world unless the
    density is fifty times less than on—</q> Two-Bit didn’t translate. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">If the density was the same or even nearly, I should
    weigh about fifty times more than I do.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Amazing.</q> The older man turned to the captain of
    the boat. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Put us ashore a minute, would you?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="boat captain">In this weather? Are you sure?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Yes, yes, go ahead. Don’t mind the waves. Go
    ahead.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    After having some trouble in the rugged surf, the boat was beached and the
    Time Keeper hopped to the ground with a box of odds and ends he had taken
    from the cabin. Within a few beclads he had constructed a crude but
    admirably serviceable balance and began measuring out equal volumes of
    sand, rock, and water. He put a bit of dirt on the balance, then emptied
    the dish and filled it with water, placing that on the balance instead. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Is your world made out of dirt?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">A lot of it is. I don’t know how much. A lot is
    water, too.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Well, Stringer Who Asks Odd Questions, if that is
    true, then I would guess that Patra-Bannk would float on water—if you found
    an ocean big enough.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">If! But that’s what I thought,</q> said Stringer
    as he climbed back aboard.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Are you sure your gravity is right?</q> asked the
    other as he gathered up his toys.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Absolutely. Everybody learns it when they’re
    ten. I forgot about it until I got here; I never had any use for it. But
    I’m sure that’s the formula.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Surely you misremembered. The observations show you
    are wrong: you are standing on your own two feet.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">No, I am sure I am right.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I am certain you are wrong. How does one figure it
    out? I’d like to check it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer shrugged. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">That I don’t know—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">But that is what is important to know.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What do you mean?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">It seems to me that it is more important to know how
    to verify what you say than to know the fact itself, don’t you think,
    especially since you’re so obviously mistaken?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I’m not sure. All I can tell you is that it has
    something to do with measuring the positions of the planets against the
    stars in the night sky—</q> Something suddenly struck Stringer. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Of course you wouldn’t know; you’re always
    underground at night.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">But I have seen stars. Once in a great while, if my
    clock is off enough so that I go out to find the sunrise much too early, by
    a few beclads, I can see one or two. I’m not sure what they are, perhaps
    balls of ice, parts of the atmosphere frozen.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer smiled. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Not balls of ice, and I don’t
    think one or two would be good enough. Somehow you have to observe the
    planets and figure out how they go around the sun—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">What do you mean, go around the sun?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">That’s what I mean.</q> Stringer then remembered
    his discussions with Taljen. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Don’t you believe
    that Patra-Bannk goes around the sun?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">No, should I?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Do you mean to tell me, Time Keeper with the Bad
    Clocks, that you have decided the world is round and yet you still believe
    the sun and the stars—all two of them—move around Patra-Bannk?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I don’t see what one thing has to do with the
    other. Anyone with eyes in his head can see that the sun goes around
    Patra-Bannk.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer laughed aloud, but it was at himself. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You’re right. Absolutely. Well, I wish you luck, Time
    Keeper Who Asks the Right Questions. I can tell you it took some of the
    greatest minds in history to figure out gravity, and I certainly am not one
    of them.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Who is?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer laughed again and was happy.
  </p>

  <nav><a href="twir_9.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown-bottom" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown-bottom&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_11.xhtml">Next »</a></nav></body></html>