<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:ab="http://example.org/audiobook-schema" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>The World is Round, Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="twir.css" />
  <link rel="icon" href="icon.svg" />
</head>
<body><nav><a href="twir_27.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_29.xhtml">Next »</a></nav><h2><div>Chapter Twenty-Seven</div>Another
  Homecoming</h2>

  <p>
    Barbalan grabbed Taljen’s hand and quickly pulled her into the room that
    would take them to Triesk. Taljen stumbled after her, the door shut, and
    they were on their way. Sitting down, Barbalan pulled her hair back and let
    a heavy sigh of relief escape her lungs. She felt safe now, a feeling that
    would hold for ten telclads. It wasn’t often in recent memory that she had
    felt safe.
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen did not speak at all for most of the trip but just stared gloomily
    at the floor. Finally Barbalan asked her, <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Do you
    understand, Taljen, that I must take Stringer south?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen nodded without looking up.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">I hope you understand that I must take him south
    to meet the others. He will be safe now, I am sure. But you would be in
    danger where he is going; I am also sure of that equally well. So it is
    necessary to bring you back to Triesk. I am sorry that you must leave
    Stringer.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen raised her head and looked at Barbalan, saying nothing still for a
    long time. Finally she cleared her throat and spread her palms on her
    thighs. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Perhaps, Barbalan, Met in the South, it is
    time for me to leave Stringer. Do you know that Stringer and I traveled
    farther than I thought the world was wide? There was hunger, sickness;
    death was close many times. We were lovers—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">You experienced a great deal together; I can
    understand your happiness.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">No. My unhappiness is not at leaving him. There is
    still much I don’t understand about Stringer. I gave him more of my life
    than I ever conceived of giving to anyone. But he wanted something from me
    that I still don’t understand. He is searching for something that I don’t
    comprehend. Sometimes I think he just hasn’t grown up right; other
    times…Barbalan, With Darker Hair Than Mine, you seem like Stringer in a
    way: often silent but knowing much more about this world than I do. I envy
    you that.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Barbalan shook her head. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">My comprehension is no
    greater than yours, I am afraid. Almost everything is beyond me and I act
    as a blind woman, only guessing which way to turn. Why I must take Stringer
    south, I do not fully understand; why people are going south, I don’t know
    yet, either. What this room is that is now taking us to Triesk is as much a
    mystery to me as it is to you. There is a lot in this world that I do not
    understand.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen managed to smile a little. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">You sound a little
    like my old teacher, the Time Keeper. He always said that he never
    understood anything. I never thought he did, either; everything he said was
    so contrary to fact. But then Stringer arrived, and everything the Time
    Keeper said turned out to be true. So I wonder how little you know,
    Barbalan.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">I think that after seeing so much of the world,
    you probably know much more than I.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">We stopped at dozens of villages. Most never heard
    of mighty Ta-tjenen. Many said that they did not use the Parlztluzan,
    although they can all trace their ancestry back to Ta-tjenen. It was so
    hard to comprehend the way they lived. Do the Gostum use the
    Parlztluzan?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Barbalan shook her head. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">I have never heard of
    it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">And was Stringer right about that, too?</q> Taljen’s
    voice rose in pitch. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Is he ever wrong? This is all
    too much for me. I cannot separate illusion from reality any more. I think
    I am as afraid to go back to Ta-tjenen as I was to leave it. I am only part
    Tjenen now. Please, Barbalan, if you ever succeed in what you are trying to
    do, tell me. I would like to think that I am a part of this new world.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Yes, I will make a point of that, Taljen.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">One thing more…</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Yes?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Take care of Stringer, especially protect him from
    himself. He has never understood how dangerous he can be. Oh, Barbalan,
    Stringer is such a contradiction to me. He could do many good things; his
    energy seems boundless, like the Time Keeper’s. But he walks like a blinded
    man, not seeing where his energy is spent. The same hand that spins a tune
    on the rodoft will slit a throat. Always I had missed seeing the tension
    within him until I saw him kill your companion on the beach. Then I came to
    know that whatever world bred him was a much harsher place than
    Patra-Bannk. That struggle is not in Ta-tjenen, was not in me. That is why
    I missed seeing it; that is why we have failed to understand each
    other. Barbalan, take care of Stringer, especially from himself.…</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">I shall make the attempt. I promise.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen smiled now, openly, but the conversation lapsed into silence again,
    this time until the trip ended with a faint thud. They emerged into a stala
    very much like the one they had left, but larger, much larger.
  </p>

  <p>
    Although Barbalan had never been there before, she easily found the
    exit. The door slid open as always and the hot air rushed in.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Yes, this is the longest Bannk,</q> she said,
    stepping into the light of the unmerciful sun burning down from above,
    though not as high as in the south. Taljen drew on her cowl and followed
    Barbalan out. The Gostum woman moved away from the stala and saw that it
    had been camouflaged with earth and fern-moss. From any distance it would
    not be visible. It stood hidden from sight in the bottom of a small
    clearing, which itself was nestled in a valley surrounded by hills on all
    sides.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Where is your city?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I’m not sure. I have not been here before. Maybe
    that way.</q> Taljen pointed south and they set off. They climbed for two
    or three telclads over the hills, barren but for fern-moss and a few
    shrubs. From the final summit they looked down. There was Ta-tjenen beneath them.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">So that is Triesk.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Ta-tjenen,</q> Taljen corrected.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">A great city. But you did not know of the stala,
    just over the first hills?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">No. We rarely go in that direction, if at all. Why
    should we?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">A curious people, these Trieskans. Will you tell
    them about it?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">About what? If I could find the spot again, would
    the stala, as you call it, be there? Or will the magic disappear with you?
    Would anyone even believe me to go and look? Or would the stala be
    reconciled to the Golun-Patra? Do I believe it? Of course not. How can I? I
    don’t know.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Then before I roast alive, I think that it is time
    I leave you. Triesk isn’t a good place for Gostum, is it?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">No, it isn’t; there is more than certainty in
    that. Good-bye, Barbalan. I hope you—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Yes, I know. So do I. Have a good life, Taljen,
    and do not mourn Stringer too long. He is not one to be mourned yet, I
    suspect.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen was silhouetted against the daylight, so Barbalan did not see her
    smile. Both turned away at the same time and parted company.
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen opened her water flask, found it empty, as it always seemed to be,
    and scurried down the north hills. She saw the black remains of the forest
    that had burned out last Bannk and knew that soon she would be working
    overtime to collect fuel and ensure that the supplies were more than
    adequate. The houses, she could see with solofar eyes, were repaired, as
    well they should be past Mid-Bannk. Ta-tjenen was still Ta-tjenen. The wind
    caught her hair, a drier and cooler wind than at Pant, but, nonetheless,
    the same wind that had carried her so far south. Or was all that just a
    dream? Taljen could hardly decide was was only glad that here, at the
    Center, the sun was more merciful than it was beyond the Edge of the World.
  </p>

  <p>
    At last below the city, she began to climb up the wide steps cut into the
    flank of the citadel. The streets were totally deserted. She should have
    expected that in the Killer Bannk, but for some reason she was
    surprised. Taljen passed one group of people hauling logs. They stared at
    her, not shouting any greeting. Was that because they were Tjenens or
    because she was not welcome?
  </p>

  <p>
    But the plaza was still white, and the sun’s hazy shadow, peering through a
    thick atmosphere, stopped abruptly at the shortest of the metal scales,
    indicating early afternoon for this longest Bannk. Taljen saw the marker
    for the Parlztluzan. Who would be her nesta next Bannk?
  </p>

  <p>
    An old woman—a member of the nestrexam?—was making her hurried way to the
    meeting tent. Taljen did not understand why the meetings were being held
    Above this Bannk. For a scorching second the woman halted and gaped at the
    newcomer, then turned and scurried off. Taljen knew that her arrival was
    now public.
  </p>

  <p>
    A few belclads more and Taljen was at the outskirts of town, near Alhane’s
    house by the city wall. His yard was covered with new instruments of shiny
    metal glistening in the sun and hot to the touch.
  </p>

  <p>
    Inside, she heard voices. Certainly one was Alhane’s; the other voices must
    be his children’s. Taljen listened.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">You see the tangled mess it is! I can’t make it any
    simpler, even as my father failed to do.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane's child">Then why don’t you listen to what he in his
    writings told you and the Alien said also: Put the sun in the center.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">But how ridiculous can that be? Would nature allow
    such a thing, I ask you? No, it is too hard to accept.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen stepped in at that moment, and the bitterness in her voice was
    unmistakable. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Why don’t you put the sun in the
    center and see what good it does you?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Taljen!</q> Alhane shouted. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Is that you? By Lashgar, I never though I’d put my eyes
    to you again! You dared come back. Amazing!</q> He ran up to her and hugged
    her rigid body. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">How did you get back? Yes, this
    <em>is</em> interesting!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I…I don’t remember.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Are you telling me falsely?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen shook her head; she wasn’t lying. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">No, I can’t
    remember. I don’t know. But Stringer wanted me to give you this.</q> She
    handed Alhane the battered journal. Then she began to cry and didn’t stop
    for a very long time.
  </p>

  <nav><a href="twir_27.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_29.xhtml">Next »</a></nav></body></html>