<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:ab="http://example.org/audiobook-schema" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>The World is Round, Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="twir.css" />
  <link rel="icon" href="icon.svg" />
</head>
<body><nav><a href="twir_23.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown-top" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown-top&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_25.xhtml">Next »</a></nav><h2><div>Chapter Twenty-Three</div>So Near and Yet
  So Far</h2>

  <p>
    Pike did not know where he was; he could barely think about where he
    was. The pain was terrible. it climbed up from the medulla and forced its
    way into the upper brain like a barbed ice pick, tearing out the inside of
    his head. Whatever nerves had once linked his motor center to his limbs
    were now disconnected. Nothing worked. If he could look through his eyes,
    he might find himself crumpled in a heap, thrown into some corner. Had it
    been a week? Five beclads? A teclad? Pike didn’t know and couldn’t think
    about it.
  </p>

  <p>
    The pain abated, and Pike struggled again to remember what had happened. He
    had reached Neberdjer. It was something like Daryephna, bigger—much—and
    disjointed, not one structure. But he had hardly noticed that while he
    walked to a predetermined destination. The four facing hyperbolas; yes, he
    remembered those. They must be above him now. Where was that?
  </p>

  <p>
    The pain again. Morse code with a sledgehammer: <em>dot dot
    blam</em>. Another ebb. Prickles here, there, everywhere. Why couldn’t he
    be killed now and be done with it?
  </p>

  <p>
    The sounds cohered. First soft moans, plosives, maybe a little afterward or
    before. The first words were clumsy, random, broken, faulty
    intonation. Quickly they gained fidelity, spoken as if by a human. The rate
    increased, words said as fast as a blur until Pike’s vocabulary was
    exhausted.
  </p>

  <p>
    Sometime later came the first sentence in perfect Bitter: <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">Tell me, what is it like to die? Please answer. I
    see you are concerned with death. I want it explained to me.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Who are you?</q> Pike managed to ask. <q ab:speaker="Pike">What have you been doing to me?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">I am Neberdjer. I have been trying to talk to
    you.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">What do you want with me? Why am I being held
    here?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">I have been trying to talk to you.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">You have been trying to kill me.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">I don’t understand what that means. Do you mean I
    have been trying to terminate your life functions?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Yes.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">No,</q> came the calm reply. <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer" class="no-close-quote">That isn’t true at all. I
    need your help. Recently I have become conscious, aware that I
    exist. Previously I may have been thinking but was not conscious of it. A
    difficult concept. I am not sure. More recently I have discovered the
    existence of Aliens. I need your help. Therefore, I have been trying to
    communicate with you. It is difficult. The concept of someone else is even
    more difficult than the concept of self, but once that is understood, the
    possibility of communication follows immediately. To construct the sentence
    <q>I am Neberdjer</q> was one of the most taxing sentences of my
    life. Previously <q>I</q> and <q>Neberdjer</q> were one, indistinguishable
    in meaning. The discovery of an independent being necessitated proposing a
    <q>not-Neberdjer,</q> a <q>not-I</q>: a <q>you.</q> Assuming the
    <q>yous</q> are independently aware of their own existence, or at least
    quasi-independent, the I-equals-Neberdjer equality is not
    universal. Neberdjer is discovered not to be the only <q>I</q>: a new word
    is needed to place in opposition to <q>I</q>: <q>you.</q> And a word is
    needed to place in opposition to <q>you</q>: <q>I</q> in your language. I
    will use that. I am Neberdjer. You are not Neberdjer. The entire experience
    raises the question of whether the concept of self can truly evolve without
    the concept of others.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
     <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">You call yourself humans, correct? You humans
     are difficult to talk to. Of course, I say that relatively speaking, as I
     have rarely talked to anyone before. Why do you think I am trying to hurt
     you?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">You are hurting me!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">Hurt? The meaning I have learned from you
    connotes nothing to me.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">I cannot move, I cannot function, I hurt. Surely you
    must see that.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">You, Pike, have been a big problem. When I first
    met you, you did not speak Barbalan’s language, which I had so
    painstakingly learned, so I could not speak to you in the simple manner I
    had developed with her. But I needed to get a message to you. At best, it
    has been tedious to have to follow individual nerve impulses, trace
    synaptic connections, and manipulate the fundamental chemical and physical
    reactions that produce words and phrases in your mind. All this I endured
    for a time with Barbalan, until I learned to speak with her. Then you came
    along. Not only were you ignorant of her language—forcing me to repeat the
    entire process—but you insisted on running away, so I was obliged to do it
    in a hurry, using an extra large portion of my resources, perhaps a
    millionth of one percent. The results are clearly dubious. Now I have been
    trying to learn your native language more systematically because it has a
    larger vocabulary than the Gostum language. And, in addition, I still seem
    to be causing you pain. I will reduce the energy levels. Would you like
    some food?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike now remembered that he had recently eaten, that this Neberdjer had
    been feeding him. The pain lifted. Pike blinked his eyes and shook his
    head. <q ab:speaker="Pike">You will let me go! I am the Polkraitz
    Returned. I am Commander of the Gostum forces and I demand that you let me
    go!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">I need your help; I have told you that
    already. The stability control mechanism—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">What?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">Is that not why you have come?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">No. I have come for the metallic-hydrogen
    manufacturing facility.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">That is of no importance.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">It is!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">The stability control, the centering—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">The hydrogen,</q> Pike insisted as much as he
    could. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Show me the facility, and I will help you.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">No,</q> came the reply all but
    instantaneously. <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">I can’t.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Why not?</q> Pike found that since the pain had
    abated, he could move.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">After probing your memories, I do not think you
    will like the experience. In fact, you won’t survive if you go through with
    it. I see you are afraid of death, the termination of life functions—a
    strange concept. I have determined from your physical makeup that you would
    not survive the trip to the facility. If you would like me to kill you by
    taking you there, I would be willing to do so without hesitation, except
    for the fact that you would not then—if I understand your death
    correctly—be available for the repair of the stability control
    mechanism. Therefore, I cannot take you to the facility. The reasoning is
    clear.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">So you lied to me. You probably don’t even know where
    the facility is. I’ve had enough of this.</q> Pike jumped up and began
    walking briskly up the stairs.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">Where are you going? I need you.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike tried to suppress his thoughts.<q ab:speaker="Pike">You have lied to
    me and have tried to kill me! You have tried to prevent me from getting the
    secret! I will invade Triesk and find it there. I don’t need you!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">Triesk? Why are you invading Triesk?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">This is the Golun-Patra and I must have the secret of
    Triesk. I am in Command, the Polkraitz Returned.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">I did not know that the Polkraitz were back. That
    is interesting.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike did not stop his running until he found the stala, blocks away. He
    gasped for air as he reached it, lying open under a domed sky with its map
    central and doors surrounding it at the plaza’s perimeter. He slammed his
    fist on the bar that he knew would take him to Konndjlan and dove past the
    door as it opened for him.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">I’ll see to you yet, Neberdjer!</q> he shouted as the
    door slid shut behind him. <q ab:speaker="Pike">You will pay for this! I
    will not leave Patra-Bannk a failure. Then you will pay. Wait and see!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The sand was burning when Pike emerged at Konndjlan. The guard was there,
    as always, ready to take him up. The heat was unbearable on this desert and
    would kill them very quickly without extreme precautions. He’d have to do
    something about that. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Give me a report,</q> he said to
    the escort.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Gostum guard">The new recruits are arriving by bits and
    pieces. You can see some ahead now. We are housing them on the plateau at
    Massarat because the Liddlefurans have still not come out of hiding.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike looked up. <q ab:speaker="Pike">How long have I been gone?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Gostum guard">The better part of a teclad, Commander. We
    were about to give you up for lost.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">So was I. Give me some water.</q> The escort
    unstrapped his leathern flask and Pike drank heavily. <q ab:speaker="Pike">What about the ultimatum to Triesk?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Gostum guard">Refused, I have been told. The spy confirms
    the rocket reports.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Indeed.</q> Pike took another drink as the grask loped
    on, orange sand flying behind its hooves and the Massarat mountains
    unforgivingly shedding their shadows in the wrong direction. <q ab:speaker="Pike">We will go to Triesk. Neberdjer will see that the
    Polkraitz cannot be stopped.</q>
  </p>

  <nav><a href="twir_23.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown-bottom" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown-bottom&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_25.xhtml">Next »</a></nav></body></html>