<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:ab="http://example.org/audiobook-schema" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>The World is Round, Chapter Two: Casting Off</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="twir.css" />
  <link rel="icon" href="icon.svg" />
</head>
<body><nav><a href="twir_2.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown-top" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown-top&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_4.xhtml">Next »</a></nav><h2><div>Chapter Two</div>Casting Off</h2>

  <p>
    It was now almost a year to the day since Stringer had first met Pike, and
    a year after Stringer had expected to leave. If it had been up to him, once
    he had decided to go, Stringer would have leaped on the rocket and departed
    immediately for Hendig’s World. Evidently Pike had other ideas. In fact, at
    first the preparations had moved so slowly that Stringer was not sure they
    were going to leave at all. But then, one day, the final go-ahead came and
    Pike’s plans proceeded in all fervor.
  </p>

  <p>
    That day, perhaps a month or so after the initial meeting, Stringer had
    been in the shooting gallery, practicing. He had been spending more and
    more time there lately, expending more and more energy on the deadly
    concentration. He liked the feeling it gave to his body.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer faced the far wall and watched from the corner of his eye a little
    ball roll off a ramp and fall in a lazy parabola to the floor. Relaxed,
    Stringer waited for it to fall halfway, then raised his pistol in a motion
    invisibly fast and vaporized the ball a centimeter from the floor. Stringer
    glanced at his pistol. Pike had told him that it was a graser: a gamma ray
    or nuclear laser. Stringer didn’t know what that was and doubted that Pike
    did, either. He shrugged, watched the next ball fall, pushed slightly faster
    than the last, and vaporized that one, too. It was easy.
  </p>

  <p>
    Valyavar was there, also. Valyavar might have had another name, but
    Stringer had never heard it, not in the short time since they had first
    met. He heard very little from Valyavar, and after that first encounter at
    Elswer’s, had made a point of avoiding him. However, Stringer did enjoy
    watching the granite giant’s daily entrance into the training
    center. Valyavar would kick open the door, march in with his sack thrown
    over his shoulder, and wipe his sleeve. He would throw his sack into the
    corner, unwrap the scarf he was wearing around his neck with a single twirl
    of the arm, throw that on top of the sack, and then do the same with his
    cloak. All but simultaneously, he would fish some mottled weed from the
    sporran attached to his belt, and, within a moment, an expertly rolled
    cigarette, done with a single hand, would be protruding from the great
    beard that covered his face almost to his eyes. Then, taller by a head, he
    would nod down to Stringer and start to work.
  </p>

  <p>
    The whole process was carried through with such elan that Stringer found he
    could only smile. But he still avoided Valyavar’s eyes.
  </p>

  <p>
    At that same moment Pike was in his office discussing the preparations with
    Hendig, who had recently recovered from his wound, when an animated figure
    burst into the room, carrying the metal ring that Hendig had given Pike as
    proof of the journey.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Have you finished testing that ring?</q> Pike asked,
    pointing to the object in the man’s hand.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="scientist">Ahh, yes. We have.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike saw that the scientist was excited. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Well, please
    continue.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="scientist">I don’t supposed you have a blackboard around?
    How can I explain anything without a blackboard?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">I suggest that you do your best.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="scientist">Well,</q> the man replied, hesitated, and then
    proceeded in one quick breath, <q ab:speaker="scientist">whatever it is,
    it’s at least ninety-nine percent metallic hydrogen.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">What’s that, may I ask?</q> Pike raised his eyebrows
    and scribbled <q>metallic hydrogen</q> on a notepad.
  </p>

  <p>
    The scientist paced back and forth, staring first at the floor, then at the
    ceiling, then picked a piece of lint off his worn shoe. <q ab:speaker="scientist">We’ve never been able to make it. Most people gave
    up long ago and said that it never existed, at least in the quantity and
    form that had been predicted by theory. You see, it used to be thought that
    if you cooled hydrogen down to almost absolute zero and then compressed it
    with pressures characteristically of several million atmospheres</q>—the
    man squeezed his fist shut—<q ab:speaker="scientist">two things would
    happen. First, it would heat back up to room temperature from adiabatic
    compression. Secondly, and more importantly, it would turn into a solid
    because of the pressure. A solid metal, you see, of course, because the
    electrons were being squeezed into the conduction bands—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Now, hold on a minute, this is a little too
    four-dimensional for me. Can you reduce it to three?</q> Pike’s request was
    ignored, and he leaned across his desk to Hendig. <q ab:speaker="Pike">These fellows are really impossible once they get
    started.</q> Then he wrote on his pad in capital letters, <q>NO
    SCIENTISTS</q>.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="scientist">It would almost certainly be a superconductor;
    you put a current in a loop of the stuff—this ring—</q> the scientist said,
    tapping the specimen, <q ab:speaker="scientist">and it goes around forever
    without decaying.  The current produces a strong poloidal field around the
    loop. That’s why that plasma torch wouldn’t touch this ring. The magnetic
    field protected it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">I see,</q> Pike said.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="scientist">What’s more, and this is the most interesting
    point, it was speculated that metallic hydrogen would remain solid and
    superconducting once the pressure was removed at room temperature. Here it
    is. This ring. It seems to be alloyed or coated—we haven’t determined which
    yet—to make it very strong and resistant, stable rather than
    metastable. Naturally, it is also the lightest metal you’ll ever see.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Are you quite finished?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="scientist">Yes, quite,</q> the visitor said, nodding
    sharply. <q ab:speaker="scientist">Except that a spherical liar is a liar
    from any direction you look at him, and we’ve examined Hendig’s story from
    all angles. You’re an optimum fool if you believe what he tells you about
    that planet.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike jotted the words <q>optimum fool</q> on his pad. <q ab:speaker="Pike">So, maybe Master Hendig is a spherical liar and I am an
    optimum fool for believing in a nonexistent planet, in which case I ask you
    a simple question: if you can’t produce the metallic hydrogen, where did
    that ring come from?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="scientist">Ah, well, I…</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Thank you for your most interesting information. Now,
    I suggest you get back to your laboratory and write up your report for one
    of your obscure journals.</q> Pike waved the man out of the room.
  </p>

  <p>
    The scientist left the office muttering under his breath.
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike sighed. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Can you imagine listening to that for an
    entire expedition? We would never get off the ground with his constant
    nit-picking. If that was a bid to get me to take him along, he certainly
    had a misconception of what this expedition was about. I put this to you:
    who needs a scientist on an economic venture?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Hendig shrugged. <q ab:speaker="Hendig">If he doesn’t believe Hendig, let
    him rot.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike laughed. <q ab:speaker="Pike">You are something of a poet, Hendig, and
    your tendency to bask in hyperbole is well known. I will not be surprised
    to find a planet twice as big as Two-Bit or one with days twice
    as long. I will
    expect to find this hydrogen. Now, in that matter, I suggest we call in
    Stringer and Valyavar and tell them the good news.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Within ten minutes Stringer and Valyavar had been located and brought up to
    the office. After he entered, Stringer walked to the opposite side of the
    room and faced Hendig.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">My boys,</q> Pike said, <q ab:speaker="Pike">you will
    be happy to know that we have just received a report from the laboratory,
    and, as I suspected, this venture will be well worth the
    expense. Therefore, we now shift into high gear.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Wait a moment,</q> Stringer said, pointing to
    Hendig. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">That’s fine. But you have never explained
    to me how this oaf is going to get us to your city.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Hendig growled. <q ab:speaker="Hendig">Navigator had charts and he
    disappeared on Hendig. I know where to find him or charts. We get them and
    then go to the city. Otherwise we have to find city by my memory.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer guessed what result that would bring. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">And
    where is this navigator?</q> he said.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Hendig">He left us on Hendig’s World.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Now Stringer laughed. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">And you expect him to be
    alive and waiting for us after twenty-odd years?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Hendig and I have gone over this before,</q> Pike
    said. <q ab:speaker="Pike">We will have to take that risk.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">And why should it be easier to get to this
    navigator than to the city itself?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Hendig">Hendig does have a map of such area. It was first
    place we arrived, and duplicate charts were made. Hendig said he shall get
    you to that navigator, and so he shall.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">This oaf is only likely to get us killed,</q>
    Stringer said. Hendig was even more of an idiot than he thought if Hendig
    believed the tale he was telling.
  </p>

  <p>
    Hendig picked up a stool and hurled it at Stringer. Stringer ducked as it
    flew over him, crashing into the wall. Once again Stringer unsheathed his
    kalan against Hendig. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">This time, Hendig, my point
    will be placed where the decision is final.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike stepped between the two and faced Stringer. <q ab:speaker="Pike">You
    had better remember that Hendig is now a colleague of yours, and you will
    have to get along with him.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">It would be easier to kill him now and save the
    extra fuel.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Stringer!</q> Pike cried. <q ab:speaker="Pike">I told
    you once before not to argue with me. Remember, I am your commander in this
    mission. Remember that.</q> Pike had raised both arms and they were shaking
    with rage.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Ahh,</q> Stringer muttered, and began walking to
    the door.
  </p>

  <p>
    Suddenly Hendig bounded after him with raised fists, but he had only taken
    two steps before Valyavar strode forward and stopped him cold with one
    swift blow on the jaw.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer whirled around and glanced at Hendig, then at Valyavar. The two
    smiled broadly at each other and left the office together.
  </p>

  <p>
    If the remainder of the year left a moment to breathe, it was a moment as
    rare to the eye as a perfect sunset. Pike needed the year, not only to
    complete the preparations for the expedition but to place his vast
    financial holdings in good hands. And although Stringer was impatient to
    leave, he conceded that the delay had its advantages. He was now an expert
    pilot; Pike had made sure of that, if nothing else. To zoom down a runway
    five meters off the ground, scaring half the support crew out of their
    wits, was something at which Stringer was now brilliantly proficient, as
    well as at performing hair-raising acrobatics in any of a dozen types of
    aircraft.
  </p>

  <p>
    The swing-winged shuttles, light of molybdenum-iridium alloy, powered by
    hydrogen, and with sailplanelike glide ratios, were designed to cover
    distances on the scale of planets. Stringer thought he could take apart
    these planes and put them back together blindfolded now. And because they
    did fly like gliders, Stringer was trained in gliders too. He learned to
    fly in such a way as to conserve a maximum amount of fuel, and to fly in
    conditions where, if one’s attention lapsed, the wings of the more
    expensive and irreplaceable shuttles could easily snap in two. Pike was not
    taking any chances. To that end, Stringer found himself becoming a fair
    electronics technician, a little harder than flying, and even learning some
    mathematics. That was the hardest.
  </p>

  <p>
    When he was flying the gliders, which Stringer viewed as an extravagant
    waste of time, and learning the mathematics, which he viewed as even less
    relevant to the journey, he occasionally thought it contradictory that Pike
    should spend so much exacting energy in preparing for every possible
    contingency while, at the same time, the entire expedition was being
    readied on the word of a liar and the evidence of one mysterious piece of
    metal. Stringer wondered if they were all fanatics. But he always managed
    to put the thought out of his mind within a moment and return to work.
  </p>

  <p>
    During that year, when Stringer did find those precious moments to breathe,
    he made sure that they were spent at least half a kilometer from Hendig. He
    was glad that Valyavar seemed to have sided with him, but even long after
    the incident in Pike’s office, Valyavar spoke little and still not at all
    outside routine training matters. Stringer decided that he would probably
    never get to know the fellow, but shrugged this off immediately, deciding
    also that it probably mattered less than nothing.
  </p>

  <p>
    One evening, at the year’s end, exhausted from overwork and yet working
    still, Stringer and Valyavar were down in the hangars, checking over the
    shuttlecraft that were soon to be sent up to the main ship in orbit. A
    technician called Valyavar over to the hangar office, saying that Pike
    wanted to talk to him over the phone. A few minutes later Valyavar
    returned.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Well, ’tseems that we’re to be off in a
    week.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">It’s about time,</q> Stringer said. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Something has to give soon. I’m feeling totally
    punch-drunk.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Valyavar leaned back against the shuttle’s shiny hull. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Tell me, if ’twouldn’t make a difference, why to
    Hendig’s World?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Why? Stringer thought. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">To get rich,</q> he replied
    aloud.
  </p>

  <p>
    Valyavar screwed up his furry eyes and studied Stringer’s face intently. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">No, that’s why I’m going, ’tis. After traveling
    across all Two-Bit and her sisters, ’ts about time I’m rich. At least that
    will comfort the body—if not the immortal soul. You, not to be. If you were
    the richest man in all of Two-Bit and had every comfort and every woman,
    you’d still have your energy and you’d still have to go. That’s clear,
    ’tis, very clear.</q> He paused, stroked his amazing beard, and smacked his
    lips loudly. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">I think</q>—another pause—<q ab:speaker="Valyavar">that you are going to find God.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer couldn’t help but laugh. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You’re crazy,
    nonlinear. Why would I want to meet a god who was evil enough to create
    Two-Bit?</q>Stringer rested his hands on the latch of the shuttle and
    pulled on it absently. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Gods don’t exist anyway, so
    there is no point in discussing it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Okay, we won’t talk about it then. But I’ll take a
    peldram of kob, my pistol, and my beard that someday you will find your
    religion and your God. Now…</q> Valyavar held his finger in the air,
    pointing skywards, and pulled a book out of his never-absent sack that was
    lying by the shuttle. The book had been carefully preserved, with inlays of
    rare jewels and white leatil. He held it up to Stringer for his inspection
    and continued speaking in his lowest voice, which emerged from a vast
    subterranean cavern concealed in the depths of his body. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Can I interest you in this ancient and priceless
    edition of the Galan Codices? They are guaranteed to bring you spiritual
    comfort in times of distress.</q> Valyavar tilted his head slightly, and
    perhaps, just perhaps, the minutest trace of a smile crossed his lips.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer doubled over with laughter, holding his sides tightly with his
    arms in an attempt to prevent his entrails from spilling out over the
    ground. Many minutes passed before the last tears were wiped from his damp
    face and his natural green-tinted gray replaced the red flush on his
    cheeks. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You were a priest?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Valyavar’s smile became a distinct frown for a brief moment. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">I was.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer began laughing all over again in his fatigue and then shouted
    hysterically, <q ab:speaker="Stringer">To Hendig’s! For glory! For riches!
    For God—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">But remember,</q> Valyavar warned, <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">first dress warmly, then put your faith in God.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I’ll remember, surely,</q> Stringer laughed. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Now I think it is time for a very long rest.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    And with that, they were ready.
  </p>

  <nav><a href="twir_2.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown-bottom" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown-bottom&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_4.xhtml">Next »</a></nav></body></html>