<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:ab="http://example.org/audiobook-schema" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>The World is Round, Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="twir.css" />
  <link rel="icon" href="icon.svg" />
</head>
<body><nav><a href="twir_29.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_31.xhtml">Next »</a></nav><h2><div>Chapter Twenty-Nine</div>To the
  Underworld</h2>

  <p>
    Darkness itself was a welcome thing in the Bannk, especially the Killer
    Bannk; that in itself was untroublesome. It was also cooler than in the
    other places they had been so far; that also was welcome, more so than the
    darkness. What bothered Stringer and Valyavar was the heavy lock on the
    iron door of the cell and the thought of who had put them on the inside.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">He’s not the same person,</q> Stringer mumbled.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">I think, perhaps, that he has become what he
    always was,</q> Valyavar said quietly. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">But if that
    isn’t the same person, I expect the same is true of all of us.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Except you. You were always perfect. I don’t think
    I’ve ever seen you lift a hand against anyone, except once, for my
    protection. You don’t need to, I suppose; you seem to understand everyone
    so well—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Sometimes my understanding is to be pressed,
    that’s for truth.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Do you understand Pike, then? Does he really
    believe what he is telling us?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">It is not clear, I’d think, that he knows what he
    believes any more.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I’m not sure what I believe any more, either. My
    arguments were almost as weak as his.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Is it to be expected that myths obey arguments?
    I’d not trouble myself about Polkraitz.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Valyavar is right,</q> Barbalan interrupted
    them. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Who cares about the Polkraitz? We are living
    in the present, not a thousand Patras ago. Now be silent and let me
    sleep. We’ll be not good to each other unless rested.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">This is truly the Edge,</q> Stringer muttered, <q ab:speaker="Stringer">truly the Edge.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Another long silence ensued, another in a long chain of silences. It was
    hard to find things to talk about. Eventually the three looked up at the
    sound of a key rattling in the lock. Food, finally. The door opened and
    several sacks were thrown in, followed by a Gostum boot and then a guard.
  </p>

  <p>
    Valyavar and Stringer picked up the food, not recognizing the sacks as
    their own.
  </p>

  <p>
    The guard was silhouetted against the light from the small opening in the
    cell, and Stringer could not see his face. <q ab:speaker="Tjenen     exile">Take these,</q> the guard said. <q ab:speaker="Tjenen     exile">Barbalan will know what to do with them.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What are you talking about? Who are you?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Tjenen exile">Do you not remember me, Alien?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I can hardly even see you, let alone remember
    you.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Tjenen exile">You saved my life once, at Triesk, near the
    beginning of the Patra.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">The exile! Then you <em>were</em> a spy for the
    Gostum!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Tjenen exile">An unfortunate one. Originally a Tjenen, of
    course, not even a Fairtalian to know how to use the stala. Quite
    expendable. But yes, a spy whose information has proved useful. Your help
    was appreciated. Without it, the information would have been lost. However,
    I am not yet so much Gostum that I do not appreciate help. No one will
    follow you where you are going. Good luck.</q> The door closed, leaving
    only silence, the silence that is always the victor in the end.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I was wrong,</q> Stringer mused.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">About what?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I saved a man’s life once. I was wrong.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Did you save him because he was a traitor?</q>
    Valyavar asked.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">No, I hardly believed in the Gostum. I saved him
    because he was dying.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">So, you’re as right as can be hoped for in such a
    situation. Don’t fret because you can’t have everything. To go?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The door was unlocked and they quietly slid out. Stringer handed the keys
    over the Barbalan. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">He said you’d know what to do
    with these.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">This way. Come! You’re as slow as the sun!</q>
    Barbalan led the way down the passage, suddenly ducking into a room on the
    right. The men heard a muffled groan, a soft crunch, then Barbalan returned
    with bloodied hands and several coils of rope. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Who
    knows how the road will be?</q> She shrugged as she set off down the maze
    again. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">There,</q> she said finally.
  </p>

  <p>
    The ancient door opened with difficulty. The ledge onto which it opened was
    narrow, and the path that led away from it was even narrower. It was a long
    way down, Stringer saw as he surveyed the vast desert beneath them. But it
    was even farther upward, and the path was soon lost in the heights.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Don’t worry,</q> Barbalan said. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">I think we are going over one of the lower ones. Only
    eight kilometers high, or nine, which means only four or five from
    here. And there is an old village waiting at the other end at which we may
    be able to rest.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Eight or nine kilometers! How will we breathe?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">With our lungs.</q>
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    Pike and his advisors were still in the great hall some telclads later when
    a frightened guard announced that the prisoners had somehow escaped.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Do you know where they are?</q> Pike asked, already
    expecting the answer that he received.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Gostum guard">No. Otherwise we would have caught them and
    not disturbed you.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike thought a moment. <q ab:speaker="Pike">All right. It doesn’t
    matter. Just guard the stala and make sure they don’t get there. After all,
    without the stala where can they go?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack had been sitting voicelessly since Stringer and Valyavar and
    Barbalan had been taken away. Occasionally he would rub his bird-beaked
    nose, but he did not enter the discussion. After the guard left he stood
    up. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">I think I should go back to Massarat to check
    on the new arrivals.</q> Paddelack hoped his heartbeat didn’t reveal itself
    as he waited for Pike’s approval.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Yes, that is a good idea.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    His legs wanted to run, but Paddelack held them in check until he was out
    of the room. He did not, however, go to the lift but turned to the ancient
    guard cells after stopping briefly at his room. As was to be expected, the
    guard was at his post. Paddelack pushed past him and walked down the
    corridor to the empty cell. The door was in perfect condition. He spun
    around to the guard, hand on his graser. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Where
    are they?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The guard shook his head.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">If you don’t tell me, I’ll blast a hole through
    your face so fast that you won’t even have time to bleed.</q> Paddelack
    demonstrated his skill on the nearest wall, but the guard shook his head
    again.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Tjenen exile">I’m not going to tell you anything.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack decided to change his tactics. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Look,
    man, if I had my head on straight, I would have let them out myself, but
    I’ve been pretty slow on decisions. <em>They</em> know what this is all
    about. <em>I’ve</em> got to follow them. Do you understand? I will
    <em>not</em> sell my soul to that man. No. You must help. It’s still not
    too late for me.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Tjenen exile">Over the old pass.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">When?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Tjenen exile">Ten telclads ago, maybe more.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack didn’t need to be told anything else. He hurriedly collected his
    things together: his hat, graser, an old telescope he used to carry on
    expeditions, and some food. He shoved it all in his pack and departed
    without another glance. He climbed, as if possessed, for nearly half a
    beclad. <span ab:speaker="Paddelack">Now we will get to the bottom of this
    planet</span>, he thought. <span ab:speaker="Paddelack">Now I will be able
    to get off.</span> He peeled layer after layer of skin from his cheeks,
    which had become sunburned during the climb. It seemed that he peeled off
    newly burned skin every telclad, the sun’s rays were so effective at this
    altitude above many of the clouds.
  </p>

  <p>
    A few small shrubs and a gray-green lichen clinging precariously to the
    rocks did their best to survive in the crevices, soaking up what little
    moisture was deposited at this height. It was not a place for living,
    despite the comfortably cool air that was such an attraction during the
    Killer Bannk.
  </p>

  <p>
    So when he was met by a party of three people as he neared the top of the
    mountain, his surprise was great. They weren’t Stringer and Barbalan and
    Valyavar. Who else could be up here? As Paddelack drew nearer, the faces
    became familiar. He knew these people. They waved him on, and he summoned
    the last of his energy to meet them at the top. Then he saw the old
    settlement buried among the rocks and froze in his tracks.
  </p>

  <p>
    Furious activity was evident. Bamboo-tree wood was being dragged up the
    side of the mountain on an elaborate pulley-and-rope mechanism. Buildings
    were being repaired and new ones were under construction.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">What are you doing?</q> Paddelack cried in
    despair.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Liddlefuran settler">When we left Massarat and descended into
    the great underground plain, we brought food and all our possessions but we
    still did not know where we would go. When we finally emerged, we knew we
    were saved. The old settlement was a few beclads’ walk under the sun but we
    knew we were all right. What is wrong, Paddelack? You saved us all.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack stared at his old friends who gathered about him. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Oh, God, Sarek. Jedoval, is this one of your jokes?
    Don’t you understand that you will die up here during the Patra?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The blank expressions that greeted his outcry were enough of an answer.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">There won’t be any air. You’ll all suffocate. You
    have to go somewhere else.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Liddlefuran settler">Where? Where is there to go?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Down. Underground again. That is the only
    place.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Liddlefuran settler">No. The Bannk is shortening now,
    Paddelack. No one will go Under again, waiting for the Fear to strike at
    any time. We have found a good home, Paddelack, and here we will stay. We
    are tired of running.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">No. It’s suicide to stay up here. You must go
    down and take all the food and supplies with you. Believe me; if you don’t,
    you will all die.</q> Paddelack knew he wasn’t absolutely sure of that
    statement, was not absolutely sure the atmosphere would collapse during the
    Short Patra ahead. No one really knew how cold it became. Maybe he was
    mistaken about the principle, but this was not the kind of principle to
    test by oneself.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Liddlefuran settler">How can we live on the underground plain?
    There is nothing there.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">I don’t know but you’ll have to. I can’t help
    you.</q> Paddelack’s eyes darted down the road toward the east. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Tell me, did anyone else come this way earlier?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Liddlefuran settler">Yes, you aren’t the first.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Tell me quickly, where are they?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Liddlefuran settler">They rested here for a little while, and
    now Mith is taking them to the underground plain. They were very anxious to
    see it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack ran over to the other edge of the village and looked down the
    snaking mountain path. If he tried hard enough, he could convince himself
    that he saw three or four figures walking down the road, mere specks in the
    distance. Tears came to his eyes, choking in his throat. He looked
    frantically from the path to the settlement and back again. He took a step
    down, then halted and backed up. He began shaking and shivering. To
    understand Patra-Bannk after such a long wait, for now he was sure he was
    so close to the answer. Or to follow these people and be given another
    chance at the life that had been lost to him more than twenty Patra-Bannks
    earlier.…He took another step down but halted a second time. No. He shook
    his head finally. He owed the Liddlefurans everything. They had cared for
    him for all those twenty-odd Patra-Bannks. How could he desert them now?
    No. Finally a decision was clear to him, perhaps the first decision of his
    life that was, in the end, clear. Paddelack turned back to the
    settlement. He would not follow this Bannk, if he ever followed at all.
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    When the boy Mith led them down the stairwell, what they saw didn’t seem
    much more than what it was, a peculiarly shaped building sitting
    conspicuously in the middle of nowhere, entangled in the profuse but
    transient growths of the longest Bannk.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">So, I think this journey is not over yet,</q>
    Barbalan said when she saw it. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">There is still
    hope.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Where can it take us other than down?</q> Stringer
    asked.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">What is in my mind,</q> Barbalan replied, <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">is that there are many shafts like this, and at the
    bottom of each there will be a way to get to the nearest stala.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">How do you know?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Neberdjer told me. Now come on.</q> They thanked
    Mith for showing them the way and entered the building. Barbalan found an
    elevator, as if she knew what she was looking for, and they descended. At
    the bottom was a deserted concourse littered with debris and human waste
    from the caravan that had recently come by. Stringer could understand why
    the boy had called it a plain. It stretched on and on until the number of
    occasional rooms that interrupted the line of sight blocked off further
    vision.
  </p>

  <p>
    Barbalan set about searching a nearby wall, as she had been instructed to
    do in such a situation. When she found the spot marked on the wall, she
    spoke aloud. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">It’s Barbalan. I want to go to
    Neberdjer.</q> Very soon a car glided along the center of the concourse,
    hovering over the floor. They climbed into the streamlined vehicle and we
    whisked away.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">’Twould seem the planet is made for traveling.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Exactly,</q> Barbalan said.
  </p>

  <p>
    They came to rest not a telclad later, and Stringer hopped out after
    Barbalan. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Do you know where we are?</q> he asked,
    surveying a scene that, as far as he could tell, was identical to the one
    they had just left.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">From what I was told, we should be below the
    Konndjlan stala.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">But surely the Gostum are swarming around up
    there. I don’t want to risk capture. If we are caught, that’s the end of
    everything.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Neberdjer said each stala has below it—look!</q>
    Barbalan ran around a bend in the concourse. Stringer squinted. Rockets!
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Can we take one?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Myself, I do not know how they work. But I think
    Neberdjer will take care of that.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Then he must be our patron saint,</q> Valyavar
    added.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer smiled. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Okay, let’s go.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Their footsteps echoed as they ran down the concourse and up the
    entranceway. As soon as they entered the lights went on. Valyavar secured
    the hatch and immediately thereafter they began moving. Neberdjer was
    indeed aware of their presence.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Barbalan, can you say where we are going?</q>
    Valyavar asked.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">To Neberdjer, the central controls of this
    planet.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Central controls?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">That is what I was told. I don’t understand any of
    that, I am afraid. That is one reason I was told to bring you, so you could
    use the controls. But it is far away, I think. On something called the line
    that divides the planet in two.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">On the equator!</q> Stringer exclaimed.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">I don’t know what an equator is,</q> Barbalan
    said.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">No time to explain now. We’ll roast alive! Surely
    it is too hot in the tropics to survive at all. Valyavar, do you think we
    can turn this ship around?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Valyavar didn’t even bother to stand up. He remained stretched out on his
    couch. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Now, Stringer, first of all, as a day and a
    year on this planet aren’t to be easily distinguished, I’m not sure that
    tropics exist from one year to the next. Where the sun happens to be
    overhead is tropics. Who’s to say it is any hotter down there than here?
    Besides, if it was to be possible, where would we go? Where are we now?
    Whose ship are we in? ’Tseems worth finding out, and if Neberdjer is where
    we are going to find out, that’s where we should go. You do want to find
    out, don’t you, Stringer?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Yes.</q> Stringer nodded sharply. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">It is time to get some answers.</q>
  </p>

  <nav><a href="twir_29.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_31.xhtml">Next »</a></nav></body></html>