<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:ab="http://example.org/audiobook-schema" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>The World is Round, Chapter Seven: Death Row</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="twir.css" />
  <link rel="icon" href="icon.svg" />
</head>
<body><nav><a href="twir_7.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_9.xhtml">Next »</a></nav><h2><div>Chapter Seven</div>Death Row</h2>

  <p>
    His shoulders were stiff from hunching over, from working in tight places,
    from the nervous strain. Stringer slumped back in his chair, shivering and
    aching. He had spent the last several weeks going over everything once,
    twice, three times and again. What could be the problem? Anything could be
    the problem. With the tremendous jolt the shuttle had received on impact,
    it could be a cracked module, a misaligned laser, any of a thousand
    difficulties. But he could not raise the <em>Crimson</em>, and now there
    was nothing else to be done. Who was he fooling to think that he could fix
    this ship to begin with? Pike, where are you?
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer leaned over the console, head in hands, and thought
    desperately. He brought his water flask to his mouth, but it was empty. He
    threw it to the floor.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I thought I might find you here.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer lifted his head to see first calloused fingers and then the tall
    woman stepping into the cabin. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Where else did you
    expect? You watch over me like a hawk.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">What is a hawk? Do you mean a sentry?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Never mind. What do you want?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    A shock of hair fell behind her shoulders as she tossed her head. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">As you say, I am to keep an eye on you. Do you think it
    would be good for you to go off killing someone else?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I don’t think you have to worry about that,</q>
    Stringer replied, turning his back to her, randomly flipping switches on
    the control panel.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I’m sorry, there was no need for me to say that. I
    just wanted to see how you were progressing.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I can’t fix it,</q> Stringer said flatly.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Ah, Stringer, Hopeless, what will you do?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I don’t know,</q> he said, standing up. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">There doesn’t seem to be much to do, does there?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">The Time Keeper would be the one to talk to, I
    think, but he is not in Ta-tjenen now.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I’ve heard him mentioned often. Who is he?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen smiled inwardly. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">He is a thing apart, with no
    nestrexa of his own. Untrusted by many but listened to at the same
    time. Even I rarely trusted him, and I was his best pupil. Definitely,
    Stringer, he is a thing apart, a true wizard.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer couldn’t bother inquiring about a man who was probably a hermit
    living off in the hills somewhere. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I’m very tired
    now. I think I want to go to sleep.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Why do you sleep so often, Tired Stringer?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Because I must; what else can I say? I come from a
    planet where the sun goes down every fifty telclads or so—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Remember, though, a telclad is not a constant—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">So I’ve heard. About every fifty telclads or so
    the sun goes down, and at about that time we go to sleep. I haven’t figured
    out when you sleep, that’s for sure. As infrequently as you do, it never
    seems to be at the same time.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen tossed her hair and laughed. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">You are more a
    Tjenen in that than you think. You judge my sleeping habits by your own,
    but, according to our clocks, you are now sleeping half a beclad out of
    phase from your habit upon your arrival. You’ve been going to sleep later
    and later in the beclad.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I have?</q> Stringer pulled a watch from a
    drawer. The flashing digits meant nothing to him any more—he had not
    bothered to check it for weeks. He turned it off and hung it around his
    neck. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">So I have.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">And I am sure you will continue shifting. Don’t
    dismay, Funny Alien. Unless each of us pays close attention to the clocks,
    a thing only the Time Keeper does for sure, we all do the same as
    you. After all, there is so little to distinguish one beclad from another,
    what difference does can it make? Our body clocks take over and find their
    own cycles—and those vary slowly against the beclads as they will. They
    vary with the Patras and the Bannks, with the height of the sun in the sky,
    with the opening and closing of the pod-trees. Our bodies speed up and slow
    down, our skin changes color and texture. Next Bannk, the Killer Bannk, my
    skin will be so dark, so leathery, that you will not recognize me. This
    Patra I will change color again completely. That is the way Ta-tjenen
    works. That is the way each of us keeps time, by our own skin, by our
    feelings, by the color of our eyes. There is no universal time except that
    of the Time Keeper.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer shook his head. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">How can this city get
    anything done? It is so dangerous to live here—how can you be so lazy about
    something like that? Isn’t everything mixed up?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Again Taljen laughed. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Not lazy at all. It is more
    efficient to let our work shifts follow our bodies. About the same number
    of people are awake at one time, so there is no problem in shifting
    shifts. If my shift gets later and later in the beclad, someone else’s will
    get so late that it will be early. The nestrexam handles the list of
    Sleepers Awake and makes sure that it is always current. That is one of the
    nestrexam’s major tasks. Similarly, classes in the Patra are held several
    times a beclad so all may attend.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer had not stopped shaking his head. Ta-tjenen was beginning to seem
    like a looking-glass city to him: flat world, shifting time, chameleon
    skin; couldn’t these people do anything right?
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">But you are somewhat correct, Stringer. There are
    special occasions, like the Parlztluzan coming, which are easier to do all
    at once…I see that things here work in perhaps looser ways than you are
    accustomed to, but perhaps not. We manage well enough. Better to be a slave
    to your own body than to a mechanical clock, don’t you think?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Ah,</q> Stringer sighed, <q ab:speaker="Stringer">there are so many things I don’t understand about
    this place. Maybe someday—</q> He chuckled at the impossibility of that
    word. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Maybe someday I will, but who knows? Now it
    is time for me to get some sleep.</q> Stringer led Taljen out of the
    shuttle and they began walking back to town. He was surprised that he had
    healed so fast. His limp was almost totally gone. Perhaps it was time to
    pick up the kalan once more and keep in shape.
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen tied the two outer cloths of her cowl together to protect her head
    from the bits of loose dirt that were being picked up by the winds, which
    were getting stronger all the time now. They had not gone far when they
    spied Benjfold, who was loading section of pod-trees into a large
    cart. Taljen ran ahead to him as he called out:
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">Hello, Taljen, nesta, and Alien Stringer.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer did not reply, and as he walked by, Benjfold caught him by the
    arm. <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">Could you give me a hand with this piece?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Silently Stringer grabbed one end of the log and they threw it into the
    cart. Silently Stringer turned away, but Benjfold began answering the
    unasked question.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">We go Under soon and will need all the fuel we can
    get for light and heat. You have no idea, I am sure, Alien Polkraitz, how
    much fuel Ta-tjenen will need to stay alive during this Short Patra.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer did not stop to listen but walked away.
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen remained with Benjfold until they had filled the cart together. Then
    she kicked the grask and the large wheels began creaking over. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">You know, Benjfold, I do not think I understand the
    Alien very well.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">Does it matter that you do?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">It does not take much to see that he is not Tjenen,
    but to pinpoint the differences is harder. I wish I could climb inside him
    to understand. But we can never do that with anyone, can we? It is the
    ultimate block. Even you, Benjfold; I often wonder what is inside you,
    though I often suspect that it is not much.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">You’re teasing me, aren’t you?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I’m sorry,</q> Taljen giggled. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">You shouldn’t get upset.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    They talked no further and headed toward the city. After leading the cart
    up one of the ramps to the citadel, depositing the wood in the nearest
    storehouse, and making a note of the entry, Benjfold and Taljen returned to
    Uslid’s house. They crossed the plaza as they always did, and Benjfold noted
    that the long shadow intersected with the outer curve. He glanced up at the
    sky. Dark clouds were moving in. Rains had appeared occasionally beclads
    ago, and heavier ones would be coming soon. <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">It
    looks as if we’ll be breaking up soon, doesn’t it?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">As we know…</q> answered Taljen, her voice trailing
    off. She felt the wind on her face, cooling now as the Bannk wore
    on. Jackets would be worn soon, and a little while after that…Windows and
    doors, usually left open, were now being closed. So it was with Uslid’s
    house, or what was currently Uslid’s house. Like most houses of Ta-tjenen,
    this one wasn’t strictly theirs, they only lived in it with Uslid for the
    current Parlztlu, the current <q>change of houses.</q> Because Uslid was
    the oldest member of this nestrexa, a family that lasted for one Parlztlu,
    the house went under his name. When Taljen and Benjfold entered, Uslid was
    sitting in the main room.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Uslid">Ah, I have seen this before!</q> Uslid chuckled. <q ab:speaker="Uslid">It is nearing time to break up.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Yes, that time is coming very soon,</q> said Taljen.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Uslid">And whom will you get?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I don’t know.</q> She shrugged. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">There are a good many whom I like well enough,</q> she
    added with a smile.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">Certainly. I suppose there is little reason to
    give the matter too much thought,</q> said Benjfold. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Will you stay with the child?</q> he asked, grinning at
    the small baby climbing around Uslid’s leg whom Taljen had borne last Patra.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">It might be nice to have a rest until the next
    Parlztlu, before the next child comes. After all, since I’m going off and
    so won’t be fertile until then, it’s allowed. And your old nesta did say
    she would take the baby.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">Well, there is to be no rest for us,</q> Benjfold
    said. <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">I choose soon. What about you, Uslid?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Uslid">Ah, the libidinal flow is still there occasionally. I
    think I’ll find somebody this time around. I’m past the mandatory age you
    know.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">So,</q> Benjfold concluded, <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">ours was a good nestrexa; I hope my next is just as
    good. But then again, I suppose one is as good as another.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Yes,</q> Taljen agreed, <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I
    suppose so.</q>
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    Stringer awoke to the sound of people in the street and music in the
    air. He shook his head in disbelief, never having heard so much noise in
    Ta-tjenen. His first impulse was to ignore it and get back to <em>Number
    One</em>, but then he remembered.…He stood, went to the window, and drew the
    blinds. The sunlight streamed in through the gaps in clouds, immersing the
    room in the yellow light typical of late afternoon. People were running
    this way and that, mostly diffusing in the direction of the great central
    park.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer dressed himself. Soon he was in the street and a few moments later
    he realized that his sun suit was not filling up with sweat. For an instant
    he was glad of that; the heat wave was ending, the heavy rains were on
    their way. But Stringer’s smile did not last long. Although the sun was two
    dozen diameters or more above the horizon, the winds were getting stronger
    with the gradual drop in temperature before the Patra.
  </p>

  <p>
    As Stringer walked up the street, his cowl continually blew in front of his
    face and dust flew into his eyes. A myriad of colors swirled before him, in
    tempo with the shifting wind and the swaying crowd. This was indeed
    unusual. Dark colors absorbed heat and weren’t worn as a rule. But yes, it
    was getting cooler.
  </p>

  <p>
    Music came from all directions. Sometimes the wind would shift and one
    group of instruments would fade out, only to be replaced by
    another. Stringer sought the source of the loudest sounds, working by trial
    and error as he was fooled each time by the vicissitudes of the veering
    flaw. He felt the atmosphere was toying with him, and he gloated in triumph
    when he stumbled, finally, onto the group he had sought. Two men were
    playing instruments with many strings stretched to a double head on one end
    and to a sounding gourd on the other. A woman was playing a long,
    reedy-sounding instrument riddled with holes. There was something different
    about the music, something more subtle and confusing than the music of
    Two-Bit; it reminded Stringer of the Tjenen language itself.
  </p>

  <p>
    Some of the stringed instruments, newly made, were up for sale on a nearby
    rack. He picked one up, examined it, shrugged, and took it, leaving
    Taljen’s name as payment. All accounts on Ta-tjenen would be settled on a
    special occasion during the Patra whose ice Stringer felt on the back of
    his neck. No doubt this account would be reckoned in as well.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer made his way across the plaza to the park. The gnomon’s shadow had
    lengthened again. It seemed like a large jump since the last time he had
    seen it, but Stringer knew that it moved only a little at a time, degree by
    degree, monotonically toward the Patra. The shadow now rested on a blue
    marker standing on its curve. A special occasion? The red pylon on the end
    of the metal band was not a sixth of the scale’s length away, and the sun
    was almost staring him in the eye. Stringer hurried on.
  </p>

  <p>
    The pod-trees were generating resin now, which would bind them close, and
    they smelled heavily of oil. More music and more dancing, pantomime about
    Polkraitz, and acting assailed Stringer’s senses. These activities seemed
    totally unusual to him. Except for the outdoor shifts, people stayed in
    their houses, generally avoiding each other.
  </p>

  <p>
    It may have been several telclads later—Stringer wasn’t sure—when he
    suddenly realized he had left the city. He found himself looking down on it
    from the northern hills. The plaza was in the center, the Center, and was
    surrounded on all sides by the park. A few streets started off radially but
    quickly meandered, and in the course of their haphazard journeys any wheel
    effect was lost. The buildings merged into one white mosaic that seemed to
    float a few centimeters before his eyes. The top of the acropolis must have
    been several square kilometers, which meant that Ta-tjenen was bigger than
    Stringer had thought. Twenty thousand people must live here, and for the
    first time since he had arrived, they were all out in the open.
  </p>

  <p>
    While Stringer sat, he heard a scuffling noise behind him. He turned around
    as several oddly dressed figures ran up the hill to his right. They were
    dressed oddly, but then again, for this occasion it was he who was dressed
    oddly. Stringer ignored the scene and set off back down the hill. The
    fern-moss covering the slopes was beginning to curl.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer was met at the door of Uslid’s house by Uslid, who, as usual, did
    not stray far from the doorway.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Uslid">What do you have there, Stringer?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer held up his instrument. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I just got it at
    the fair, or whatever this is. I thought I’d try playing it just for
    diversion.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Uslid">A rodoft, I see, and it is very difficult to
    play. But I can get you a teacher if you want.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">No time for that.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Uslid">Tell me, have you enjoyed the Festival of Lashgar and
    the Polkraitz defeat?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">So this is the occasion of my defeat?</q> asked
    Stringer, wondering who could possibly have a name like Lashgar.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Uslid">And what do you mean by that, Stringer?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Don’t you believe that I’m Polkraitz? Half the
    people around here do, whatever Polkraitz is—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Uslid! Uslid!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Uslid never responded to Stringer’s question and swiveled around to see
    Taljen running up the street and out of breath.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Gostum have been seen! Everyone is on the watch!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Uslid">Gostum!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Someone said they saw a band of Gostum heading
    toward the north hills, but that’s all. Should we join the search?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Uslid knew it was hopeless, and so did Taljen. <q ab:speaker="Uslid">We
    can. Maybe it is best we should. Do you know how many there were?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Four or five, I was told. So it might be
    dangerous.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer realized that he did not understand the discussion, so he went
    into his room and fell asleep shortly.
  </p>

  <p>
    He awoke later and found Taljen in her room eating by herself. Her normally
    wavy, well-groomed hair was now dirty and tangled. Her shirt and pants were
    covered with dirt and grime.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Am I interrupting?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">No, of course not. Please come in, Stringer.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">How long were you gone? I just woke up.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I don’t know. Who but the Time Keeper can ever
    tell?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Did you find what you were looking for?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">We didn’t find the Gostum, Stringer, but that was
    expected because we didn’t know where to look. Whenever the Gostum strike,
    it is out of thin air. Where is there to look?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Who are the Gostum?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The surprise at being asked that question was clearly evident on Taljen’s
    face. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">You don’t know?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I wouldn’t have asked if I did.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Their defeat is what we celebrate this beclad.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">But who were they? Why were they at Ta-tjenen?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen’s eyes grew noticeably wider. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Why at
    Ta-tjenen?</q> she repeated with a toss of her head. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Isn’t it obvious? Because, Stringer, Ta-tjenen is the
    Center. If you were going to found a great city, wouldn’t you put it at the
    center of the world?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer winced, squeezing his eyes shut, and, of course, shook his
    head. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Do you mean you weren’t joking when you told
    me that before, that the map in the meeting tent which show Ta-tjenen in
    the center really means it? It isn’t just for convenience?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Of course it means it. Don’t you see that Ta-tjenen
    is in the center?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">But what about those other two cities on the map?
    Why shouldn’t they be at the center as well?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">They were founded by Tjenens after the struggles
    ended. They are offshoots and not the Center, Alien. Other than those, do
    you see any more cities? It follows we are in the Center.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer brushed back his floppy hair with a quick movement of his hand. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I don’t see how anything can be at the center. No one
    place on the globe is at the center.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen leaned back and smiled. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Ah, yes, that is
    right. You believe the world to be round like a ball. In that case, there
    is no center except the middle. Otherwise there is a Center, and Ta-tjenen,
    being the city of the Polkraitz, is it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">All right, all right. Forget that. Who were
    they?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">A great race living here. Ta-tjenen is a great city,
    don’t you think, Alien? And before the revolt it was even greater—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">When was that?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">When the Polkraitz founded the Center, it would
    appear. Since the Polkraitz fled on the first Golun-Patra and this is the
    twelfth, that would make twelve Golun-Patras ago, or about—let’s see—eight
    belbannks.…</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer began to feel as if he were walking around in circles for all the
    good that these nonanswers were doing him. But he quickly translated eight
    belbannks into over a thousand years. So the Polkraitz, whoever they were,
    left over a millennium ago.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">The Gostum decided to move the Center to the south,
    which was clearly an act of insanity and which the Tjenens resisted. But
    some of the Polkraitz, not knowing any better, sided with the Gostum. You
    can be sure there was a great war and a bloody battle over where to place
    the Center, here or in the south. Most of the population was destroyed;
    everything was lost, and things pretty much started over again. The
    Polkraitz fled, vowing to return, and their Gostum slaves were exiled. They
    left in ships like yours. Where they went we do not know, but they still
    come to plague us, fanatics who take us on five to one. They are indeed
    fanatics, dressing in black during the Bannk, black with one orange
    stripe.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Black and orange? I think I saw some people
    wearing those colors earlier.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">You did! Where, Stringer, where?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I was sitting up over the city, on the north
    hills—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">You were up on the north hills? Why didn’t you tell
    us? Stringer, you knew that they were seen going in that direction. You were
    standing by when I told Uslid.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">It didn’t even occur to me. I thought they were
    part of the festival.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">How many were there?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Four or five.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen sprang up, her fury instantly doubled. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Stringer! How can anyone act like you? Have you walked
    away from your mind? You knew we were looking for four or five on the north
    hills and you said nothing! Nothing at all! Are you that empty? A Tjenen
    you certainly aren’t—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I said it didn’t occur to me. I didn’t even know
    what a Gostum was.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">If you were caught in the Patra would it occur to
    you? I suppose not. Oh, Silent Stringer, why do you never speak when you
    should?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I will be caught in the Patra, it has occurred to
    me. Has it occurred to you?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Stringer, I gave you an extra two teclads.…Now I
    understand you. I understand you well. You think only of yourself. You have
    no nestrexa in your mind, for sure. I’ve never heard of such mindlessness,
    Alien. Now, if you will not help the nestrexam, you will help me. Come
    on. Let’s find the others.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer picked up a graser he had taken from the shuttle and led a group
    of several dozen to the spot where he had been sitting earlier. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">They were climbing straight up there.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen moved in the direction of the outstretched arm, and Stringer could
    see by the energy that manifested itself in the way she climbed that her
    anger had not subsided. He followed her. The ground was firm where it was
    not covered with the closing fern-moss, so there were no footprints to
    trace.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Didn’t you cover this area earlier?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Yes, but not much farther up. Come on.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    They continued up the hill until they reached the summit, finding nothing.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="someone">Well, that’s the Edge,</q> said someone.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer sat down.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">What’s wrong, Stringer,</q> asked Taljen. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">You look puzzled.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I’m sure they went up this way. But there doesn’t
    seem to be any place for them to have gone.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">That’s true. Aside from Ta-tjenen, there aren’t many
    places to go.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">But even you will have to admit they went
    somewhere.</q> Taljen remained thoughtfully silent as Stringer took a few
    steps down the hill. All he could see were the little ferns retreating into
    their spores for the Patra ahead. He sighed and glanced up. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Look! Do you see that?</q> He pointed as he cried,
    and all turned their gaze to the south, beyond the south.
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen froze in her tracks. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Verlaxchi’s against
    us. This is the end of Ta-tjenen!</q> She began running down the hill
    toward the smoke that was beginning to spread across the southern forest.
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    Because there was no darkness during the Bannk, save what was caused by the
    ever-increasing clouds, one could expect a good portion of the people of
    Ta-tjenen to be awake or asleep at any given time. The city, if it ran at
    all, ran continuously. By the time Stringer and Taljen had reached the
    central plaza, the gnomon’s shadow could not be seen on the
    ground. Thousands of people crowded there, some still dressed in their
    festival garb, others in sun suits.
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen shoved her way into the meeting tent, and Stringer followed as
    closely as possible. Because of her status as tree watcher, she was not
    hindered. Where she reached the tent the nestrexam was there, Kenken Wer
    standing as usual, but not calmly this time. There was no calm at this
    gathering.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">Taljen!</q> Kenken Wer commanded. <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">Tell me how we are set for fuel this Patra.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen stopped to catch her breath. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">We’ve completed
    the farming for this Patra. After all, we go Under in a teclad or less. So
    we are set this time. I cannot predict yet about the next.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    It was only then that Kenken Wer noticed Stringer standing behind
    Taljen. <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">You! You Polkraitz! This is the Golun and
    you are Returned. You have brought this upon us! You and those Gostum
    beasts who are your slaves! I will tear your eyes out with my own
    hands!</q> She flung herself at Stringer, who drew his gun reflexively but
    then fended her off with his hands instead.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Do you think I would come to such a hellish place
    as Ta-tjenen of my own free will?</q> Stringer shouted as he caught the old
    woman by the arms. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You have a forest fire burning
    up your fuel. Don’t you think you should worry about that instead of me? I
    am one man; your whole existence is at stake.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Kenken Wer, he is right. We have work to do.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Kenken Wer jerked herself away from Stringer with fire in her eyes. <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">I will see to you later,</q> she spat at Stringer’s
    feet.
  </p>

  <p>
    Benjfold appeared at that moment, pushing his way around bodies. <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">The wind is blowing mostly south and east,</q> he
    said, interrupting. <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">We are probably safe, but the
    entire forest is in the fire’s path, and with the resin now being produced,
    who knows how far it could spread?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Because of the recent rain the forest is damp, but
    the resin is inflammable,</q> Taljen said. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">We have
    got a problem. It could spread all the way to Glintz. And Glintz, the Time
    Keeper has told us, is almost two thousand kilometers away.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">We must try to cut it off,</q> Benjfold
    decided. <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">Everyone get tools and axes and
    shovels. We must try to cut it off.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    People started dispersing, but not quickly enough, Stringer thought,
    considering the emergency. When he left the tent he could see the smoke,
    opaline, rising up from the forest and fanning outward. It curled up,
    tightening on itself until the strong wind caught it and blew it
    southward. He thought he could see flames spreading across the treetops and
    imagined the crackling of bursting pods filling the air. He hoped that his
    shuttle would be all right; to hope was about all he could do.
  </p>

  <p>
    Ta-tjenen did not sleep that beclad. The smoke obscured the sun when the sun
    itself was not obscured by clouds. The air acquired an acrid taste that
    hurt the throat and burned the lungs. Swarms of bidrifts, small birds with
    oily skin, interrupted their preparations for the Patra and flew to the
    north hills. Rodents, or what looked like rodents to Stringer, found their
    way up the ramps and stairs to Ta-tjenen’s citadel, crowding the streets
    already overflowing with people and sharing their food. The fire, damp wood
    or no, found plenty of fuel in the forest and left a charred trail of tree
    stumps and ashes as it worked its way south to the cities near the edge of
    the world.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer stood with Taljen and Benjfold some kilometers south of
    Ta-tjenen. Their faces were covered with grime, their clothes ripped and
    limbs bruised. Choking on the bitter smoke that cut through his lungs,
    Stringer continually brushed back the ashes that were falling into his
    eyes. He had just felled a tree while helping to clear a fire channel and
    almost toppled back, exhausted. He sat down on the felled trunk and watched
    a small animal run past, tripping over itself in a frantic effort to escape
    the heat and flames.
  </p>

  <p>
    Hundreds of people had spread out, trying to clear the channel. Stringer
    heard a scream and turned just in time to see a group of fire fighters lost
    behind a new wall of flame.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">We’re losing,</q> said Benjfold. <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">It moves fast, Stringer, very fast, and is now far
    south. Tell me,</q> he continued, sitting down beside Stringer, <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">did you bring this upon us?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The question was asked so matter-of-factly that Stringer would not have
    gotten angry even if he were less exhausted. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">No, I
    didn’t. Believe me if you want, don’t if you don’t.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">Well, this is the Golun-Patra.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">So I’ve heard.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">What do you think we should do now?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer sighed, paused, and cocked his head. There was a spark in his
    eye. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Is there any way of getting far south, way
    past the fire, far enough so that we have time to clear a great area?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">We could take the boats and sail down the coast
    for a beclad and start work there. But this is a dangerous time of Bannk to
    be going far, I can tell you.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Do you have any choice?</q>
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    The boats set sail within a quarter of a beclad. Ta-tjenen had several
    hundred fishing boats at its docks, and they were quickly loaded with
    whatever firefighting equipment could be found. Benjfold had decided to
    lead the contingent south, while Taljen would do what she could near
    Ta-tjenen.
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen caught Stringer by the arm as he left Uslid’s house with a sack
    slung over his shoulder.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">You are going, Stringer.</q> It was not a question.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Yes,</q> he said, hardly looking back.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I don’t think you intend to return. I saw your eyes
    at the mention of Glintz the other beclad in the tent.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Yes, I’m glad to hear it is far, but not too
    far. What would you have done in my position? Thanks for everything you’ve
    done.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen’s voice rose to its upper range, the high, piercing upper range that
    could shatter eardrums. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I’ve done nothing more for
    you, Alien, than I would have done for any Tjenen.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">All right, have it your way: thanks for
    nothing.</q> Stringer found Benjfold, and they made their way down the
    winding street to the outer walls, which intersected the westbound shore
    road. Stringer kicked away the rodents that got in his path.
  </p>

  <p>
    The piers were not large, having been made for small boats. Choosing the
    smallest boat of the dozens that he could see, Stringer climbed in,
    throwing his sack over the bow before him. Benjfold followed and took the
    tiller.
  </p>

  <p>
    The wind was a strong and steady southerly, never shifting much farther
    than southeast. Stringer had hoped the trip would be a delight. But
    Stringer wasn’t delighted. There were the waves that swelled and troughed,
    leaving huge valleys for the toy boats to vanish in. To his right, the only
    scenery was burned-out forest, an occasional flame visible through gray
    clouds and soot. On his left, the sun was streaked not only by the heavy
    clouds but by the dirty smoke that crept across the sea and flattened over
    the horizon.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer leaned over the boat’s edge when he dared and stared at the beach
    for telclads on end. The water pounded hard, but every few hours it seemed
    as if the whole level on the each would rise and fall. It was the only
    thing that convinced Stringer that they were moving at all.
  </p>

  <p>
    A beclad or two later, the boats pulled in permanently to shore, and the
    Tjenens began to disembark and head for the clearing. Stringer thought
    their group a ridiculously puny gesture, especially with the rains due to
    arrive any moment. But now he didn’t care.
  </p>

  <p>
    He waited until everyone had left the boat except Benjfold, who seemed to
    be waiting for him to make the first move. Stringer obliged.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Don’t wait for me,</q> he said, drawing his
    graser.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">What are you doing?</q> Benjfold asked with a calm
    that betrayed an expectation of the action.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Taking the boat south.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The reply was unexpected. <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">Can you sail it?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">It’s small enough. I’m no sailor, but I’ll
    manage. I’ll have to. The wind is with me, and Glintz shouldn’t be
    impossible to reach by any means.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">Do you know where it is?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">South. Seventeen or eighteen hundred
    kilometers from here, I would guess.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">The trip is dangerous and will be easier with
    two.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Why should you?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">You have helped us during the fire. I’ll help you
    now. Let me tell someone to take charge while I’m gone.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    They set sail in short order. Even so, they could see a doubly clouded
    northern sky and could almost hear the crackling of the flames and taste the
    bitter smoke.
  </p>

  <p>
    Some hours or telclads later, Stringer fell asleep and Benjfold took over
    the sailing alone. The next thing Stringer saw was a cockeyed view of the
    boat tumbling away and water engulfing him. He coughed, spat, and struggled
    to stay on the surface. The boat was out of reach and gliding quickly away
    from him. Stringer pulled out his graser and fired at Benjfold’s head but
    missed.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">Do you think I’d visit you on Glintz?</q> Benjfold
    shouted as he steered the boat around, angling it out to sea. <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">But here, Polkraitz Murderer, survive on this!</q>
    Benjfold hurled Stringer’s plastic sack overboard and it bobbed up and down
    on the water. Stringer swam for the sack and tied it around his arm.
  </p>

  <p>
    The boat was much too far now to overtake. Stringer swam instead for the
    shore, which was maybe a half-kilometer away. He dragged himself up on the
    beach, sack trailing behind him, and collapsed. His clothing, drenched and
    heavy, did not dry quickly, not now in late Bannk, and he was left
    shivering in the dirty wind.
  </p>

  <nav><a href="twir_7.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_9.xhtml">Next »</a></nav></body></html>