<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:ab="http://example.org/audiobook-schema" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>The World is Round, Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="twir.css" />
  <link rel="icon" href="icon.svg" />
</head>
<body><nav><a href="twir_34.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown-top" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown-top&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_36.xhtml">Next »</a></nav><h2><div>Chapter Thirty-Four</div>The Logic of
  Scientific Discovery</h2>

  <p>
    The desk was cluttered, which was not unusual because the desk belonged to
    Alhane. The old books were opened before him with columns of figures
    scrawled in a fine, neat script. Alhane constantly wondered how his
    predecessor could have wasted time being so neat. After all, life was too
    short to bother with such refinements. But, he conceded, the old Time
    Keeper’s neatness did make things easier.
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane shivered, pulled his blanket up over his shoulders, puffed life into
    his frozen fingers, tried passing them over his heating coil, then finally
    scribbled down some more figures. Oh, how he hated simple
    arithmetic. Geometry was better. Why couldn’t they be separated? Why
    couldn’t he be better at both? One thing for sure, a mathematician he
    wasn’t. A short snort of amazement—or of disgruntlement—escaped him after
    he finished the computation, and he heard a tapping at his open door.
  </p>

  <p>
    Naturally, it was Taljen. Except for his children, she was the only one
    whom he ever bothered with these days. She needed the bother. Her old self
    had disappeared somewhere on that trip south, and now only the strained
    smile she wore on her face recalled her earlier incarnation.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">So, Alhane, Tireless One, you have been pouring over
    those numbers for teclads now, more than a Patra-Bannk. And what have you
    found?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Other than a headache, you ask? Well, it seems as if
    my father made good measurements. So far all of mine agree with his, and
    the clocks can be set by the stars. What an amazing idea! I thank him. Of
    course, I will continue checking.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen sat down on the one bed in Ta-tjenen. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">But
    what have you found?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Well,</q> Alhane sighed, pulling up his blanket
    again. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Do you want a blanket?</q> He gave his
    graskhide to Taljen, who accepted it gratefully. Alhane thought that if he
    had a pan of water in the room, it would freeze over this Patra. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">At first, after you convinced me to put the sun in the
    center, I thought for sure that nature would have made the orbits
    circles. If you were nature, wouldn’t you do that? Squares don’t seem very
    probable. After all, why, I ask you, should a planet first go in one
    direction and then suddenly change to another? Any force emanating from the
    sun certainly wouldn’t act in such an erratic manner. But a circle, now
    <em>there</em> is an aesthetically pleasing shape. Unfortunately, all my
    work over the last Patra-Bannk indicates that the orbits, at least the
    orbit of the Runaway, isn’t quite a circle. Almost, but not quite.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">What do you think it is?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane snorted again, then sneezed. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I am
    certain—they must be ellipses. After circles, ellipses are unquestionably
    the most pleasing of all shapes. Nature would have been foolish to pass up
    such an opportunity—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">But?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Humph. I have finally derived an equation here for
    an orbit. And if it is an ellipse, I can’t see it. Therefore I have made a
    mistake and will have to start looking again. I renounce this equation!</q>
    Alhane lifted his arm and was about to throw the paper away, but Taljen
    caught his hand.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">How do you know that your equation is not correct
    and the orbits are, in fact, not ellipses?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I trust my nose and not foolish equations.</q>
    Alhane sneezed. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Well, are you ready to help me set
    the clocks?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen stood up. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">That’s why I’m here.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Good. It has been too long since I made the last
    trip Above. Now, let me see…</q> Alhane took out his father’s star charts
    and found the star he had currently been using to set his clocks. He made a
    mental note of its position so that when he went outside, he would be sure
    to find it.
  </p>

  <p>
    As he was bent over the paper, Taljen asked, <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Why are
    you so worried about keeping your clocks set, Alhane? We always come out on
    the right beclad, even with the old way, even if you never set your clocks
    all Patra.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Sometimes we do. You might not know the difference
    between one beclad and another, but I do. So don’t tell anyone, all right?
    Now, help me get into this quazzat. The Patra is deep and my old body will
    need help in confronting it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    A little while later, Alhane was wrapped in the layers of graskhide, wool,
    and parkas that made up a quazzat. He checked the chemical heaters in the
    boots, ensuring that there was plenty of air for insulation and that his
    hood was totally unfurled.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Will you be all right?</q> Taljen asked anxiously.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Of course,</q> came Alhane’s muffled voice, <q ab:speaker="Alhane">As long as I keep moving and breathe through my
    nose. Now, help me up.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen opened the inner door to the air lock Alhane had built directly
    under his house. Handing him a lantern, she shut the door after him, and
    Alhane pushed open the hatch that led into one of his workrooms. The house
    was empty. Pieces of roof, having fallen during the winds, littered the
    floor. The door was blown in and large holes gaped in the ceiling. Alhane
    had seen this often enough; it did not bother him. Repair would begin as
    usual at Bannk’s beginning.
  </p>

  <p>
    The little yard was quiet. A glaze of ice covered everything, too cold to
    be slippery, reflecting the starlight in half-seen images. The air was not
    quite as still as it was cold, but the wind was mild in midpatra, seemingly
    frozen out of the sky. Only the long hood on his quazzat heated the air
    enough for Alhane to breathe, or else his lungs would freeze, too. He
    cleared his mouth and the spit tinkled against the snow, frozen solid
    before it hit the ground.
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane spent a moment, as always, gazing upward and smiling. Then he bent
    to his instruments. He had two tasks now: first to set his clocks, then to
    take a new reading on the position of the Runaway. He found the star he had
    been following, easily identifiable as the brightest in a rosette of five
    others. He bent to his quadrant and sighted along the notched eyepiece,
    then brought his lantern close to the metal scale and took the reading. He
    ran over to the house and shouted down his speaking tube to Taljen. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Do you have that?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Yes, I’ll check the charts for the time.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane turned next to the Runaway, another planet, he was sure from what
    Stringer had told him. He sighted it and took an accurate measurement of
    its position. Amazed at his own stubbornness, he still did not fully trust
    his father’s readings, even though they all agreed with his own. But
    perhaps a new reading would show him where his equation was wrong. New data
    never hurt.
  </p>

  <p>
    Finished, Alhane stood up and took one more look around before he prepared
    to go Under once more. Something caught his eye on the plain to the west of
    Ta-tjenen, on one of the planting fields. It was a light! A large circle of
    yellow light, with smaller bright spots inside, illuminated a big part of
    the field. What could that be? Light in midpatra? By Lashgar—or was it
    Sarek?—that made no sense.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I’ll be down shortly,</q> he called to Taljen.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Where are you going?</q> Taljen called up after him,
    but she received no answer.
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane held his lantern in front of him as he set off for the light. His
    destination was marked but the path to it unlit, and he fell time and again
    on the rock-hard snow and ice.
  </p>

  <p>
    A scant kilometer later, he reached the periphery of the light and was
    surprised to see a large building being erected. Three walls built of
    precious tree trunks and other materials had already been constructed. Men
    scurried back and forth and gathered around bonfires. Searchlights shone
    into the dark and lanterns were strung, burning not with flame and swaying
    in the wind. What could they be doing out here when it was suicide to
    remain Above for more than a telclad or two? Alhane wondered. In the midst
    of all the activity sat three ships, just like the one Stringer had
    flown. Stringer! Could he have returned? Alhane started running toward the
    construction site. Stringer back? How amazing!
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane was now close to the circle of light. He could easily hear the
    cutting of trees and the moving about and the hammering of wood. Men
    continually came and went into the three spacecraft, replacing others for
    the new shift. A small figure standing in the darkness outside the area of
    illumination, Alhane was not noticed. Should he try to find Stringer? The
    idea of seeing him again was exceedingly pleasant. He never though it would
    happen.
  </p>

  <p>
    Well, he said to himself, if I am going to risk freezing myself to death, I
    should not do it for nothing. No, by Lashgar, if by no one else. Alhane
    walked forward into the camp. No one stopped him; under his bulky wraps he
    looked no different from anyone else. He drew close to one of the fires,
    hopefully to warm his feet since the heaters had ceased.
  </p>

  <p>
    Two men paused briefly at the fire next to Alhane. He heard them talking
    with an accent so strange that it was not even his own language. He
    listened for a few moments to this odd dialect and finally began picking
    out familiar words and then putting together whole phrases.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Gostum worker 1">Do you think the plan will work?</q> he
    heard one say after he had taken a moment to reconstruct the sentence.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Gostum worker 2">It is a good plan. Our Commander has never
    failed, has he?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Gostum worker 1">Careless men have died out here, even
    careful ones.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Gostum worker 2">Is that the Commander’s fault?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Gostum worker 1">Yes, you’re right about that. This Bannk,
    Triesk will fall for certain and the Polkraitz will be Returned.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane jumped and moved quickly away from the fire. He circled outward
    again, this time passing close to one of the shuttles. On the wing was a
    black patch crossed with orange. Gostum! An invasion! A surprise attack!
  </p>

  <p>
    The cold, which was now beginning to creep through Alhane’s boots, could
    not have made him move any faster toward the city than he would have on his
    own.
  </p>

  <p>
    When he climbed through the airlock, Taljen was still waiting for him. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Alhane, your spirit and your reason have parted
    company! I thought I’d never see you again.</q> Her voice was modulating
    quickly and the tempo was fast. For a moment she paused and slowed down. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Did you get the reading for your planet?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Yes, no, I forget. Verlaxchi’s out for us now. I’m
    almost ready to believe there’s something to this Golun-Patra.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">But your reading—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">It’s not important now. I’d thank you to take it
    again for me. I must see the nestrexam.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Alhane! Have you walked away from your mind? What
    happened out there?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane was not listening but was hurriedly removing his quazzat, blindly
    stumbling toward the door with the outer parka stuck over his head. Taljen
    grabbed him as he collided with the door frame and pulled it off. She
    steadied him by the shoulders. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Alhane, Old Teacher,
    please tell me what has minced your head.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">My young student, who never believed anything I
    said, you certainly won’t believe this: there is a Gostum camp not more
    than a kilometer from here and they are preparing to invade
    Ta-tjenen. There are also three shuttles out there like Stringer’s.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Stringer!</q> Taljen cried. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Is he there?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I don’t know; I didn’t see him.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen’s eyes grew misty and lost what little sparkle remained in them. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">And I thought that I was finally free of him, that I
    was on my way to forgetting him.…He must be there. The last time I saw him
    he was on his way south with a Gostum woman to find his friend. She knew
    where this friend was. Stringer must be Returned.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Do not jump to conclusions, Taljen.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Am I?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The Time Keeper turned toward the door. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I must see
    the nestrexam,</q> he said without looking back.
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    The nestrexam was in session. Alhane paced furiously, waiting for the
    couple who had failed to conceive before one of them went off. An important
    matter, indeed.
  </p>

  <p>
    Finally they finished and Alhane was called. He walked in, his breath
    visible in the cold air.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">What is it, Alhane?</q> asked Kenken Wer. <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">You’re acting like a crazed Verlaxchi.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">You’ll be acting like that in a moment, you old
    fools.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">Alhane, we don’t need this. Speak what you want
    to speak.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Ta-tjenen is going to be invaded by the Gostum. I
    saw them building a camp a kilometer west of here, with Alien shuttles, and
    heard them speaking of the invasion.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">In the middle of the Patra? You are the only one
    foolish enough to venture out there.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane had expected this reaction. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">And now the
    Gostum have also become foolish.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">But how can we believe you?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Look for yourselves! Don’t you ever do that? If I am
    wrong, then I am the only fool and no harm is done. If I am right and no
    precautions are taken, then all of Ta-tjenen will be destroyed. I’ll be in
    my workroom.</q> Alhane spun around and left.
  </p>

  <p>
    He found Taljen waited silently in his workroom among the ticking of his
    clocks.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Did they believe you?</q> Taljen asked, looking up,
    her voice constricted by choking sobs.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">No, but they will very shortly.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen lapsed into silence.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">You are thinking of Stringer. Not very Tjenen of
    you.</q> Alhane walked to one of his desks and rummaged about under some
    papers. He pulled a worn book from the mess and held it out to Taljen. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Do you remember this, Taljen?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen nodded. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Yes, it’s Stringer’s journal.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane tossed it gently to her. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">You might read
    it. Maybe it will tell you something you didn’t know before and your hate
    for Stringer will subside. Maybe not. But, I ask you, read it before you
    pass judgment on Stringer as a traitor.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    A messenger called Alhane to the council room at that moment. Already word
    must have begun to travel, because the room was densely packed with
    people. At least that made it warmer.
  </p>

  <p>
    Kenken Wer stroked her chin. <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">You are right,
    Alhane. There are Gostum to the west with Alien solofars. Surely this is
    another result of the Golun-Patra and the Alien Stringer. He should have
    been executed, clearly.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">What makes you so sure it is Stringer?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">The evidence: he came on the Golun, was found
    with a dead Gostum, he killed, he caused the fire; he is the Polkraitz
    Returned. The Alien solofars lie at our Gateway; what other evidence do you
    need?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane felt his surety slipping but also found himself shouting. His voice
    squeaked. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">You have no direct evidence and you are a
    bunch of superstitious old fools! Why do you not confront the problem that
    is at hand instead of falling back on your useless superstitions? Polkraitz
    or not, argued from now until the crawfish whistles on the hill, does
    nothing to alter the problem.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">What do you suggest?</q> Kenken Wer sighed.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Asking my advice?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">Yes, we are asking your advice.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane couldn’t remember the last time his advice had been sought by anyone
    but Stringer. It was an interesting sensation. He liked it. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I thank you. We are in a very bad position. You feel
    the cold creeping in on us. The Tree Counters could tell you what is in
    store for us next Bannk and any Patra afterward—if there are to be any. Now
    we have the Gostum to face, surely. If we fight, we lose time collecting
    fuel. Even if we win, the time is still lost, that I can tell you without
    being Time Keeper. Death is a certainty if we fight. Surrender is the only
    possibility. At least in that even, there is hope.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">No. The result is known. Gostum show no
    mercy. We would all be killed.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Would we?</q> Alhane asked.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="nestrexam member">There can be no argument about that,</q>
    said another of the nestrexam, <q ab:speaker="nestrexam member">but if you
    want, we can hold a referendum.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane shook his head. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">No, the outcome of that would
    be clear.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    After a poll of the nestrexam had been taken, Kenken Wer announced, <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">We must prepare for the attack and defeat of the
    Gostum.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <span ab:speaker="Alhane">This is collective suicide,</span> Alhane
    thought. <span ab:speaker="Alhane">Realizing that survival beyond next
    Patra was, at best, dubious, they have decided to kill themselves.
    Call it a war, it was still suicide.</span> But Alhane shrugged it off—for
    the time being. When a house is burning, one doesn’t waste time deciding
    what to do with it. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">All right. We must begin
    immediately. I have a few ideas.</q>
  </p>

  <nav><a href="twir_34.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown-bottom" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown-bottom&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_36.xhtml">Next »</a></nav></body></html>