<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:ab="http://example.org/audiobook-schema" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>The World is Round, Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="twir.css" />
  <link rel="icon" href="icon.svg" />
</head>
<body><nav><a href="twir_18.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown-top" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown-top&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_20.xhtml">Next »</a></nav><h2><div>Chapter Eighteen</div>Confronting the
  Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</h2>

  <p>
    Perhaps a teclad after the discovery of the other planet, Stringer found
    Alhane, as usual, at his cluttered desk.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">It’s no use,</q> the Time Keeper said as Stringer
    walked in after a long shift on his sailplane.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What’s no use?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">You say that I must observe the planets and chart
    their courses to figure out gravity. How can I chart the course of a planet
    if the sky changes so slowly? My star has disappeared, and who knows how
    long it will be before it returns—if it ever does?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer was still sweating from his run up from the old storeroom and was
    anxious to return there, but he sat down, anyway. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Alhane, Time Keeper, I see that you want to do
    everything yourself, discover the whole Universe. But that is too much for
    any one man, even you. At the rate that Patra-Bannk moves—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Patra-Bannk doesn’t move!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">At the rate the stars move, I’m sure that it would
    take you many Patras to piece together the entire sky, if you could do it
    at all. That, Time Keeper Who Is Impatient, is a life’s work for any
    man.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Then what can be done?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Either you make that your life’s work or you use
    the work of another.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Who?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You come from a long line of Time Keepers. I
    realize that the Patras are deep and no one goes out except in an
    emergency, but I find it hard to believe that you are the first to observe
    stars. Man’s curiosity is deeper than the Patra. Didn’t a Time Keeper of
    the past leave anything?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane started, sighed deeply, and nodded. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">You’re
    right. My father must have. I just realized.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What do you mean, you just realized?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">My father died after I had nine Bannks and ten
    Patras. I was there. The last thing he said to me was, <q>I hope you can
    understand the stars.</q></q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">And just now you get around to it?</q> Stringer
    cried.
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane laughed slowly. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I didn’t remember it until
    now.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer scowled. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I don’t believe you could forget
    a thing like that.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">First of all, I didn’t understand what he was
    talking about—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Still, with your curiosity—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">You don’t understand, Stringer. I think I hated my
    father. I must have intentionally ignored the advice for Patra-Bannks until
    I truly did forget about it. I am sure you have done the same at times.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Perhaps. But hated your father? Then how did you
    become a Time Keeper at all?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">It isn’t a matter of choice. I was brought up to
    it. By the time I had eleven Bannks and ten Patras, or maybe a little
    older, when I was old enough to choose, it was too late. I hated my parents
    for it—that is, until I discovered how to love the work for itself and
    divorce it from my mother and father. Some prospective Time Keepers do that
    and end up like me—for better or for worse. Others don’t, like my younger
    brother, and don’t become Time Keepers.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You know, I think you are the first person in
    Ta-tjenen whom I’ve heard admit to really hating somebody.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">It could well be. A disease which seems peculiar to
    Time Keepers, unfortunately.</q> Alhane rose. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I
    think it is time to check my father’s data.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    He walked into the other room, where old binders were piled from floor to
    ceiling. Oddly enough—or perhaps not—his father’s notebooks were on the
    bottom of the pile. Alhane yanked out the bottommost and the whole pile
    scattered over the floor. Alhane fell along with them and Stringer slapped
    his thighs in laughter. Then they got to work examining the notes.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Listen to this!</q> Alhane exclaimed after the third
    book was opened. <q ab:speaker="Alhane" class="no-close-quote"><q>Contained
    in these books are two dozen Patra-Bannks’ worth of data that I have
    collected pertaining to the motion of the stars, in particular the one I
    call the Runaway. I have observed the stars with painstaking care long
    enough so that I am convinced that they repeat their positions in the
    manner shown herein. Assuming this repeatability at constant intervals, it
    follows that we should be able to use the positions of the stars to set our
    clocks, and indeed, I have done this for the last several Patra-Bannks,
    finding that I can predict sunrise with great accuracy without having to
    make many excursions Above immediately before the dawn. This should benefit
    all future timekeeping.</q></q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Unbelievable!</q> Alhane cried with a squeak. <q ab:speaker="Alhane" class="no-close-quote">The stars repeat their
    positions! What an amazing idea!  To use the stars as clocks instead of
    clocking them! I thank you, Father!  Look, he continues:</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane" class="no-close-quote"><q>I ardently hope that these
    heavenly motions, which seem to me most intervolved and beyond
    comprehension, may, in a future Patra, point the way to some understanding
    of Patra-Bannk’s place in the Universe. I say this because repeated failure
    on my part to deduce the orbit of the Runaway around Patra-Bannk from these
    data may indicate that Patra-Bannk is not the Center of our cosmos. When my
    son is a little older, I will speak to him about carrying on the work,
    although at his present age he seems rather disinclined to the
    profession. Signed, Annel, Time Keeper after Arpen.</q></q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Well, how about that? Thank you, Annel. Tell me
    truthfully, Stringer, did you know this was here?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">No, it was a reasonable guess, that’s all.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Well, I will have to check his data. I hope it is
    useful. Of course, he must be wrong about displacing Patra-Bannk from the
    Center.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Well, I wouldn’t worry about it too much.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Why not?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer smiled a cockeyed smile. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Once somebody
    told me—when I was much younger—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">You couldn’t have been much younger or you would
    have been a baby.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Merely a child. He told me that the Universe is
    collapsing on itself, that once everything was expanding and now it is
    collapsing, and that sooner or later everything will get very hot and we
    will all be crushed together in the center.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Do you mean all those stars are falling on
    Patra-Bannk?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Yes. And since that is going to happen and
    everyone will be killed, I don’t see much point in worrying about things
    like that, because the worry will never amount to anything in the end.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane wrinkled his nose. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">You don’t strike me as the
    philosophical type, Stringer—if you strike me as anything at all. Tell me,
    does this bother you?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">No, but I thought it might bother you; that’s why
    I brought it up.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Hmm. Yes, you’re right. Is there anything that can
    be done about it?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Stopping the Universe from ending? Who could do
    that?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Indeed, who could do that? Well, if everything is
    going to be destroyed, I’d say we’d better move all the faster for it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Right. And we do have a sailplane that wants
    finishing.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Yes, yes, I’ll be with you shortly.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer knew what that meant and thought he’d better get to work himself.
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">And this, My Stringer, is how we are going to get
    south?</q> Taljen surveyed the sailplane whose fuselage was now almost
    solid and whose long, slender wings were taking final shape on the bench
    next to it.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer ducked under a wing tip and flexed the new joint to test its
    strength. Before the Going Under, Stringer had cannibalized what remained
    of <em>Number One</em>’s left wing in order to use it as a model for the
    cross section of the wings for his glider. Now he fervently hoped the
    transfer would be successful.
  </p>

  <p>
    He turned to a nearby stove which Alhane had installed and lit the fire,
    placing on it a pot of hard resin refined from the pod-trees. After it had
    melted and filled the room with stink, he took a brush and started painting
    the hot liquid on the body of the sailplane. The resin was hard and strong
    when cooled and would make a good substitute for the plastic normally used
    to make sailplanes.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">And what is that for?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Polish to make the glider smooth. A rough surface
    will mean a disturbed airflow and kilometers lost. That isn’t allowed.</q>
    Stringer lapsed into silence and continued brushing on the first layer of
    the outer shell of the plane.
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen tossed back her hair. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Can I help?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer smiled. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Yes. Paint this on as smoothly as
    possible. Don’t let it drip.</q> He handed her the bucket and got to work
    filing down a protruding nailhead. The grating annoyed Taljen’s ears, the
    same ears that were at home with a thirty-one-tone musical scale.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Won’t you stop that?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Sorry, it’s necessary. More kilometers.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    They continued to work together for a few beclads until Taljen put her
    brush into the bucket and watched it sink beneath the surface of the
    resin. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Did you ever figure out your gravity?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer remained silent for so long a time that Taljen gave up hoping he
    would reply. Unexpectedly he spoke. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Do you think a
    planet could be formed hollow? Sort of have a big cavity on the inside?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen shrugged. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I suppose so. The sky is hollow, so
    why not a planet?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <span ab:speaker="Stringer">Why not?</span> Stringer repeated to
    himself. <span ab:speaker="Stringer">Why not?</span>
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    The Patra drifted onward with the stars. The wait seemed endless to
    Stringer, but he knew it could not last forever. All the light tanks had
    flickered out long ago, their dynamos either frozen or broken by the winds
    or both. Now the halls were lined with ducted torches. Alhane was seen less
    and less as he became more and more absorbed with the problems of
    timekeeping and astronomy. All his life he had considered the two
    activities separately. The sun kept time—when, during the Bannk, its shadow
    could be seen through clouds or haze; stars were a rarely seen curiosity,
    so rarely seen as to be ignored. After studying his father’s data, it was
    clear to Alhane that timekeeping and astronomy were one and the same. And
    now he might really have the opportunity to live up to his title of Time
    Keeper.
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen and Stringer continued to work on the sailplane. Stringer scavenged
    the Junk for controls; used viewport material from the old Polkraitz ships
    to fashion a good canopy for the cockpit that was smooth and had wide
    visibility. He trusted his intuition. Pike had trained him well, and now
    the training was going to pay off. It had to.
  </p>

  <p>
    He tried to put gravity out of his mind and concentrate on the work he was
    doing. But occasionally, disturbing thoughts of hollow planets invaded his
    mind. When that happened, he did not sleep well. And he was not sleeping
    well now, even though, as always, he was sleeping in Taljen’s arms. His
    tossing and rolling kept her awake, too, so she rose and went to the
    nearest communal room. Well, she had been sleeping too much lately, anyway,
    with this Alien around.
  </p>

  <p>
    The room was practically empty because most of the people in this section
    of town slept at approximately the same time. So she went to another and
    sat there for a while, watching the lively dancing and games. Some telclads
    went by without Taljen’s having the urge to join in the fun. She was
    getting bored and was considering leaving when Kenken Wer sat down next to
    her.
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen stood up.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">Sit down with me, Tall Taljen,</q> Kenken Wer
    said with genuine politeness. Taljen obliged and sat down again in her
    usual cross-legged fashion, her hands on her knees. <q ab:speaker="Kenken     Wer">I am told you are going south with the Alien.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Words cannot be kept boxed up in Ta-tjenen, that is
    certain.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">Why are you going?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen’s voice lowered slightly in pitch, enough so that another Tjenen
    would certainly notice it. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I’m not sure, Kenken Wer,
    but it is clearly time to go.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The old woman leaned back against the wall and listened to the strong beat
    of the music for a moment. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">You’ve changed much,
    Taljen, much, I think, since the Alien came. It has been a long time since
    I have seen you dance. I have never seen anyone spend so much time with one
    nesta before. You used to mingle; everyone was so close to you.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Is that unusual? Who is not close to anyone
    here?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Kenken Wer shook her head sadly. <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">You are not
    happy because of the Alien. We can get another nesta for you if you
    wish. Staying with the Alien is perverse. Do you realize he committed the
    first murder here since the revolt? How can you wish to stay with such a…an
    <em>Alien</em>?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">How can I wish to be with anyone? One is as good as
    another here, all good, all bad, even Stringer. He will do for now, as all
    nesta.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">How will a murderer and a Polkraitz do?</q>
    Kenken Wer shouted. <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">Why do you want to pollute
    yourself with his presence?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen stabilized her voice. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Because I think he may
    know something about the world that Ta-tjenen may not know.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">What can he know that is not self-evident?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">He says that Patra-Bannk is round, like a ball, that
    he understands how gravity works—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">What nonsense! Do you believe him, Taljen?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Not yet, but Alhane does.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">Alhane! Half the cause of all this! Do you
    believe him, that old Time Keeper?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">She never has,</q> Alhane said as he walked into the
    room, <q ab:speaker="Alhane">but she will go and see.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen nodded mutely.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">See what?</q> Kenken Wer demanded, rising to her
    feet. <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">Do you want to see her swallowed up by the
    collector of winds? Or falling off the Edge of the World?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">There is no Edge of the World, I am convinced. My
    experiments, I thank them, show—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">Your experiments! Have we not picked enough
    holes in them? Look around you, Alhane! Is it not clear that the world is
    flat? Where do the winds go if not collected when they get south?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I don’t know,</q> Alhane replied honestly. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">A new mechanism will have to be devised.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">It is unlikely, Alhane, old Teacher,</q> Taljen
    said. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">You will have to explain many things,
    including Stringer’s gravity.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">If it is right, mind you.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">It is better than yours, and the discrepancy with
    what we feel is easily explained if the world is flat.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Kenken Wer nodded in approval.
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane stammered, <q ab:speaker="Alhane">But—but my data indicates that the
    world is round and that new mechanisms will have to be devised—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">Your data again. Next you will be telling us,
    Time Keeper, that Ta-tjenen is not the Center.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">If that is the case, then I will say that—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen shook her head slowly. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Alhane, that is very
    hard to believe.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Kenken Wer did not relent. <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">I have seen your data
    when you presented it to the nestrexam. Do you think us unintelligent
    fools? You and your minute shadows. What can they say? Look around you. All
    is flat; Ta-tjenen is all there is in the world, other than Glintz and
    Godrhan. You look north, south, east, or west, and but for the hills, the
    distance looks the same. It follows that we are central. And has anyone
    ever sailed around? No. But if the world was as you say, one could sail
    around—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">But—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">Your problem is simple, Time Keeper Alhane: you
    do not know how to see with your eyes.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane spun around, glaring at Kenken Wer’s wrinkles. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">And your problem, Kenken Wer Who Stands at the Center,
    is that you do not know how to see with your imagination!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Kenken Wer recovered quickly. <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">I should hope
    not. Imagination is for your dreams, Alhane; we are talking about
    reality.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Reality is not determined by referendum—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">—nor by wishful thinking on the part of one
    man. I won’t let you send Taljen off with that Alien to be swallowed up
    with the winds or fall off the Edge of the World.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I will go,</q> Taljen said softly.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">Then you believe Alhane?</q> Kenken Wer asked,
    startled. She had assumed she had won the argument.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">No, I hope he is wrong.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">Then you want to die past Godrhan, disappearing
    off the face of the world?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">No, whoever heard of anyone wanting to die?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">Then why are you going?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Because things aren’t the same any more, because I
    must find out.</q> Taljen walked quickly away from the old woman, leaving
    her alone amid the music and dance that had continued uninterrupted by the
    argument. Alhane walked off also, in another direction, not remembering why
    he had entered in the first place.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer was sitting up on the mat when Taljen returned, crying. He sat
    shivering, staring at the walls with eyes widened and jaw hanging. Taljen
    forgot her tears.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Stringer—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer jumped up, glanced sharply at Taljen, then turned quickly
    away. Taljen knelt beside him and steadied his shaking body with her
    own. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Stringer, I’ve never seen you like this. What
    is it?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer stood up and poured himself a glass of water, thus exceeding his
    ration. He drank the water in one gulp, then poured himself another.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">What is it?</q> Taljen repeated.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer shook his head. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I was having trouble
    sleeping. The gravity was bothering me. I don’t know…I was having
    nightmares.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Can you tell me what it was?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I can’t really remember. It was horrifying. Almost
    like someone deep inside my brain trying to tell me something. Sometimes my
    dreams are so real, it is almost as if someone else were trying to talk to
    me.…</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen sat down in front of Stringer, facing him. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Does this happen often?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer hesitated for a long time. deciding whether he wanted to
    answer. He began to speak slowly. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Off and on, for
    as long as I can remember. When something is bothering me, I can never
    sleep. Sometimes, like now, it is horrible because…because I don’t have
    control. Do you understand?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen shook her head.
  </p>

  <p>
    Again Stringer hesitated, holding his fists clenched, this time trying to
    find a way to explain. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Put a kalan in my hand
    and…and suddenly I have an almost conscious control over my entire
    self. Put me to sleep and I am knocked around in my dreams as if I am their
    puppet: torn, murdered, ripped in half, put back together again. I hate to
    sleep; there is no control. But there is something in sleep. I am sure that
    I do most of my thinking in dreams. Often, when I awake, I have the
    solution to what’s been bothering me. Not this time. If only I could use
    dreams the way I use my kalan…</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer sighed in puzzlement. He left the room to work on the
    sailplane. He had to be south at Bannk’s beginning. If that wasn’t clear
    before, it was clear now. Because the answers would be there with Pike and
    his magic city.
  </p>

  <nav><a href="twir_18.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown-bottom" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown-bottom&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_20.xhtml">Next »</a></nav></body></html>