<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:ab="http://example.org/audiobook-schema" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>The World is Round, Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="twir.css" />
  <link rel="icon" href="icon.svg" />
</head>
<body><nav><a href="twir_15.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown-top" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown-top&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_17.xhtml">Next »</a></nav><h2><div>Chapter Fifteen</div>A Brief Glimpse
  Underground</h2>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">I’m getting too old for this,</q> Paddelack
    grumbled as he threw down his sword and seated himself by the
    wall. Effrulyn stood leaning against the hard stone next to him, also
    watching the activity in the center of the room with a skeptical face.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">The Commander seems to be enjoying himself. Such
    trivial pastimes. The mind rots.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">And what do you do other than throw fixed
    Angles?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">I?</q> Effrulyn looked down his nose at the older
    man sitting on the floor. <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">I am a
    mathematician. That is the reality.</q> The sound of metal against metal
    echoed off the walls.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Always imagined mathematics went out with the
    Polkraitz.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">Indeed it did, for a time. More recently there
    have been a few practitioners. I have improved upon them all.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Improved upon?</q> Paddelack repeated. Pike had
    just made a good parry. He was getting better.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">Yes, I’ve long since mastered geometry. Now I have
    succeeded in finding the area under a curve with a new method of my own
    devising.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">You’ve invented calculus? This I have to see.</q>
    Paddelack groaned as he lumbered to his feet and followed Effrulyn out of
    the room.
  </p>

  <p>
    The giant Karrxlyn grunted as Pike stopped his blade, but he regained his
    smile when Pike was caught off guard by a knife at his chin. <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">Use two hands in all things. Remember that or you
    won’t live long.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike nodded, understanding the message if not all the words.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">Enough of this for now. I believe it is time for
    your language lesson. Come with me, Commander.</q> The warrior set off in
    meter-plus strides, his heavy cape flowing behind him. He spun around and
    the metal of his sword flashed at Pike, but the new Commander parried it
    with a quick sideward jerk of his spear.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">Good!</q> Karrxlyn bellowed with laughter and put
    his arm around Pike’s shoulder. <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">But do not
    flinch. Smoothly, always smoothly. Now to your lesson.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike smiled but kept his free hand on his knife.
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">So,</q> Paddelack said, <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">you really have invented calculus, as far as I can
    tell from this idiotic notation of yours. Have you done anything with your
    mathematical endeavors?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Effrulyn stared at Paddelack in disbelief. <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">Done
    anything with it? Mathematics is for itself. But…</q> he paused, looking
    downward, <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">I am afraid my objectivity compels me to
    confess to one impure act.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack’s eyes gleamed and he grinned his toothy grin. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">And what might that be? If, of course, you aren’t
    afraid to talk about it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">It’s cold in here.</q> Effrulyn lit the fire in
    the room and shut the door. <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">You understand that no
    one is aware of my involvement in this. If word gets around, I will end up
    doing nothing but impure applications. So silence is requested.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Absolutely.</q> Paddelack nodded eagerly.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">I was recently approached by one of the others,
    and he complained to me of the difficulty in keeping time. The clocks were
    so bad that the Checkers had just missed sunrise by more than a beclad. I
    told him that I was not interested in things of such nature—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Of course.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">Yes.</q> Effrulyn glanced down at the one or two
    pieces of paper on his desk. <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">Then he told me he
    had noticed that a swinging weight seemed to swing with a constant
    period. He wondered if that fact could be used to build a better clock
    mechanism, but he had no way of knowing for sure. I am certain that he
    never had another idea in his life. He does very little other than build
    bad clocks. He asked me if I could demonstrate that the swing of a weight
    was truly constant. After incessant whining on his part, he finally
    persuaded me. I showed that it was approximately so. It was a fairly simple
    matter; I didn’t even need my new mathematics. And you see the result: that
    monster in the great hall. Always clacking away—click, clack, click,
    clack—and disturbing my thoughts. A fitting reward for my labors. And what
    good is it? It may keep good time, but as all the other clocks were off to
    begin with, the fool had no way to set this one. After all, we had missed
    sunset. But everyone is very taken with it, even though it may be
    wrong. Not only that, the idiots don’t seem to realize that even if it is
    the most accurate clock we have, there is no way of checking its
    accuracy. And they tell me it is the greatest advance in timekeeping since
    they decided to keep the teclad constant and vary the number of teclads in
    the Patra, instead of keeping the Patra a constant number of teclads and
    changing the length of the unit.</q> Effrulyn sat down at his desk and
    waved Paddelack away. <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">I ask you, what difference
    can it possibly make when the idiots have no idea of what they are doing in
    the first place? Toys, that’s all that clocks are, toys. Let them play with
    their toys. Who cares what time it is when there is work to be done?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack quietly left the room and shut the door behind him. He heard the
    bolt slide firm on the other side and tried hard not to break out into
    gales of laughter. He then realized he was probably late for Pike’s
    language lesson, even though, of course, there was no way of telling.
  </p>

  <p>
    The huge clock on the dais of the great hall did indeed clack away as its
    long pendulum swung slowly back and forth. Every so often the clock next to
    it would buzz loudly and the short timepiece would add its voice to the
    general cacophony. But the noise did not disturb Paddelack as it did
    Effrulyn, no more than it did the two guards who stood on either side of
    the timepieces. Paddelack sat down with the old Fara-Ny and Karrxlyn. They
    had already begun the lesson, and Pike seemed to be stuck on a point.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Good, I see you have arrived. Tell our respected hosts
    that I would be interested in having the secret of the Fairtalian explained
    to me.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    After Paddelack had made the translation, Fara-Ny replied, <q ab:speaker="Fara-Ny">Of course, Commander. Karrxlyn, show him how to open
    the pendant.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Karrxlyn did so, and Pike studied the compass, maps, and list of cardinal
    numbers inside. <q ab:speaker="Pike">I am afraid you will have to explain
    this to me.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Fara-Ny">Certainly,</q> replied Fara-Ny through
    Paddelack. <q ab:speaker="Fara-Ny">When you have learned to read better,
    you will see that you have directions to the nearest stala. The stala is
    the method we use to travel, which you were so curious about. I am afraid I
    cannot explain how it works other than to say that it does. One enters the
    stala and emerges—Elsewhere.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Elsewhere?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Fara-Ny">I have difficulty in describing even that. Where
    the Elsewheres are located is a matter of speculation, although we have
    identified a handful of them, notably Triesk, with the help of the old
    map. But as to most, be they north, south—or elsewhere, who can say?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">How long have you known about them?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Fara-Ny">Some for belbannks, some only recently. More and
    more Elsewheres seem to become accessible to us as the Bannk’s heat trails
    into memory. At most Elsewheres, however, the Fear is present, or an overly
    hostile environment, so we have severely limited our travel. It is odd,
    though, that most of the Elsewheres have been discovered since the visit of
    the earlier Polkraitz, Hendig. Suddenly many Elsewheres were available to
    us.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Hendig?</q> Paddelack exclaimed. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">How did you know him?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Fara-Ny">We heard of him from the Liddlefurans. I have been
    told you were a companion of his.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack nodded. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Yes, I came with him.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Interesting,</q> Pike said. <q ab:speaker="Pike">I’d
    like to see this so-called stala.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Fara-Ny">I am afraid that is impossible,</q> Fara-Ny
    replied, with a wheezing sigh. <q ab:speaker="Pike">The Patra is now too
    deep and the walk is too long. You will have to wait for the Bannk.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">It seems that I will.</q> Pike pulled his cloak around
    him and stared at the flickering torches. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Well,</q> he
    said abruptly, <q ab:speaker="Pike">let’s get on with the lesson!</q> He
    slammed his fist on the table and looked around, smiling.
  </p>

  <nav><a href="twir_15.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown-bottom" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown-bottom&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_17.xhtml">Next »</a></nav></body></html>