<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:ab="http://example.org/audiobook-schema" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>The World is Round, Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="twir.css" />
  <link rel="icon" href="icon.svg" />
</head>
<body><nav><a href="twir_24.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown-top" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown-top&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_26.xhtml">Next »</a></nav><h2><div>Chapter Twenty-Four</div>Two
  Epiphanies</h2>

  <blockquote ab:speaker="Stringer">
    <p>
      <strong>Entry 22:</strong> The sun is high. I can’t bear to look at it,
      even though this murky haze does its best to blot out the light. Clouds
      are few, and those are very high in the air, as high as the sun, it
      seems. Mostly it is just this stultifying haze. My hands are nearly black
      and carved from heat and wind, except where the red shows through from
      bruises and infections. Taljen tells me my hair is lighter than it was,
      bleached by that evil light. Every few telclads I peel off newly burned
      skin, always unexpected because of the diffuse sunlight. Always it seems
      to get hotter and wetter.
    </p>

    <p>
      Now I know why they call this the Killer Bannk. No one greets us any more
      when we land. We must seek out help from villagers hiding in their buried
      houses or caves. There is no activity this Bannk. Everyone has fled from
      that bearer of life, the sun.
    </p>

    <p>
      The land is barren. Little vegetation and few animals present
      themselves. Only the strongest survive here. Most of the animals we catch
      for food are in a kind of hot-weather hibernation to preserve energy. I
      imagine Patra-Bannk must be much as it was millions of years ago,
      evolution slowed nearly to a halt by the fantastic temperature
      change. Better always subfreezing or always boiling than this hellish
      swing from one to the other.
    </p>

    <p>
      The beaches, even though locally of white sand, are hot. Rocks are too
      hot to touch. The air is stiflingly humid here on the way south. I always
      feel on the verge of nausea. Sometimes I think I can see steam boiling
      off the ocean at water’s edge, although I wonder how the air can absorb
      any more water than it already has. I begin to wonder also how long we
      can survive. I have rarely felt so continually sick.
    </p>

    <p>
      Taljen urges me on, but even she grows weary of the journey. What point
      is there in it for her? She has nothing to gain by going, only exile from
      her beloved Ta-tjenen. I think I have fallen in love with her. For all
      her fear and superstition, she has shown herself to be a brave and good
      companion.
    </p>

    <p>
      If my writing is indecipherable, it is because we are in <em>Nothing</em>
      and my pen jitters because of the ride. We are nearing our next stop.
    </p>
  </blockquote>

  <p>
    The sand sprayed up as <em>Nothing</em>’s wheel and skis touched the
    ground. The village, small from the air, was invisible from the
    ground. Stringer and Taljen jumped from the sailplane and off the hot
    sand. The walk to the town was a few kilometers over fern-moss and
    low-lying scruff. Their sole company was, of course, the sun, which did its
    best to convince the two that each step was three times its length in
    reality. Taljen kept close to the few trees that were tall enough to
    project shade, and scratched her itching suit.
  </p>

  <p>
    Only one man was visible outside the settlement, itself as barren as the
    surroundings, houses no more than caves set into the embankment. The lone
    man was hurrying to the cluster of dwellings with an adz thrown over his
    shoulder. He stopped when he noticed the two strangers but did not seem
    surprised at their presence.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="villager 2">So you too are going south,</q> he said in a
    dialect that Stringer strained to understand. <q ab:speaker="villager 2">I
    may go myself.</q> He offered Taljen his leather water flask.
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen’s own flask was empty and she accepted the offer. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Why is everyone going south?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The man walked around to a shaded spot and knelt, propping himself up on
    the handle of his adz. <q ab:speaker="villager 2">I see that you dialect is
    very strange, even stranger than that of the last people I saw who said
    they had come up from the south to get us. Something is afoot.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Can’t you tell us what it is?</q> Stringer asked
    exasperatedly, moving into the shade and slumping down. He was very tired;
    he was almost dead.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="villager 2">There are rumors. No one is saying for sure, but
    it has been rumored that the Polkraitz are Returned and are readying to
    take us off this planet, as they so promised ages ago. The way south is
    magic and takes us beyond the World’s Edge. Who knows what is going on? But
    if it will get us out of the sun, it’s worth finding out.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer withered under Taljen’s glare, hotter than the sun.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Stringer, did you have something to do with
    this?</q> she asked.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">If I have been at Ta-tjenen or with you all the
    time, how could I have had anything to do with this?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Polkraitz can do many things, I suspect.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer threw up his arms. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">When will you believe
    me, Taljen? When?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Every time I start to trust you, my Stringer, you
    do something to make me doubt you. The arrival with your dead companion,
    the murder at the Festival, the exile. Now this. What am I to believe?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer didn’t understand how Valyavar entered the argument, but he shot
    back, <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Yes, you’re absolutely right. My companions
    and I are Polkraitz. We are Returned to take over Patra-Bannk. You are my
    first hostage and will be intermediary between us and the Tjenen slaves.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen stammered. Could she believe what she was hearing? For an answer she
    found only pain and confusion. She backed away from Stringer.
  </p>

  <p>
    They slept apart for the first time in a forgotten number of beclads.
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You have only three grask in the entire
    village?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="villager">Yes, that is the case, truly.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer bit his lip.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">That will have to do, don’t you think?</q> Taljen
    interrupted.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Yes, it will.</q> Stringer turned to the big
    man. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Can you bring them to the beach? We’re about
    three or four kilometers away.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="villager">Except to fish, I never go that far myself,
    especially this Bannk.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer took a gulp of water from the urn and splashed it over his
    face. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">We have to launch our sailplane—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="villager">What?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">How can I explain unless you come to the
    beach?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The big man stroked his rough chin. <q ab:speaker="villager">All right,
    we’ll come.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    It took a long time for Stringer to explain to the small group what he
    wanted done. The first problem was to keep the villagers outdoors in heat
    that could easily have been over seventy or eighty degrees. The second
    problem was to convince them that the sailplane wasn’t alive.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="village woman">Why can’t it fly away by itself?</q> one of
    the women kept asking as she prodded the faded nose with her forefinger.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">It needs your help to get it off the ground,</q>
    Stringer repeated for the dozenth time. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">We will
    sit in it. Your grask must pull.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="village woman 2">Does it let you sit in it without
    squawking?</q> another asked.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="village woman 3">When a solofar squawks, the air shrieks for
    all around,</q> agreed a third.
  </p>

  <p>
    And so it went. Finally Stringer checked the ropes and the release hooks,
    made the man in charge repeat the instructions three times verbatim, and
    climbed into <em>Nothing</em>. He hoped the three grask, strong and fast as
    they were, would be enough. It was more than a hope; three grask
    <em>had</em> to be enough.
  </p>

  <p>
    He waved his arm and slid shut the hood. <em>Nothing</em> bumped along on
    the beach. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Faster!</q> he yelled.
  </p>

  <p>
    The grask drivers didn’t hear correctly, if they heard at all. Stringer
    jumped out, angry.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">You’d better let me explain,</q> Taljen said, and
    she did.
  </p>

  <p>
    This time <em>Nothing</em> barely cleared the rise down to the beach, but
    <q>barely</q> proved to be good enough. Stringer was glad to be away from
    that village.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Can you imagine,</q> he said as they soared down
    the coast, <q ab:speaker="Stringer">that I couldn’t even convince them that
    this bird was artificial?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Did you expect to?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer cocked his head. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What do you mean?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen banked the plane and took a few turns up. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Is
    it truly that hard for you to see? This sailplane is big like a solofar, is
    painted like a solofar; from a distance it could be a solofar, so to those
    villagers it is a solofar.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">It doesn’t look like a real bird to me.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">It did to me when I first saw it. But we are used to
    it now. We built it, know it all the way through, Stringer. But they have
    never seen an artificial bird. They have never even considered an
    artificial bird. Is it so hard for you to see that the first thing they
    would think is that <em>Nothing</em> was alive? A small solofar just like
    any other?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">No, I guess I can understand that.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Good. How far is the next village?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer took out the viewer. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Far enough,
    especially with the fading wind. The ocean is heating; far from the
    terminator the winds aren’t as strong. Our progress gets slower all the
    time.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">What can be done?</q> Taljen shrugged. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">We have to keep going.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">For what? It has been so long. Pike and Hendig may
    be dead. Then what?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen answered after a long hesitation. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">If you feel
    that way, why did you come?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What else was there to do? Maybe it doesn’t
    matter. At the next village we will probably only find two grask, and that
    will be the end of us.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    This time Taljen did not answer at all.
  </p>

  <blockquote ab:speaker="Stringer">
    <p>
      <strong>Entry 25:</strong> It is just Mid-Bannk, and we are not halfway
      to our destination. It is getting hotter all the time, and I think we
      will all evaporate. I have just finished a thirty-kilometer walk. We
      mistakenly landed at a deserted village, but luckily the new settlement
      was nearby. I will have to convince the villagers to bring grask back to
      where I left Taljen. She was cheerful when I left her. I hope the heat
      hasn’t killed her by the time I get back. If it weren’t for her company,
      I don’t know what I would do. Part of her seems to distrust me still. But
      I can complain; I’ve earned it.
    </p>

    <p>
      People are going south from this village, too. Soon all the villages will
      be deserted and our incredible luck will end.
    </p>

    <p>
      My body feels worse than it has ever felt before. I am bruised, my
      clothing is ripped, my hands are pulpy. There is no spring left in my
      movements. My tiredness is not the kind that leaves you after a long
      sleep, but that which follows you around everywhere you go. It is almost
      time to give up. What a fool I was to ever think this journey was
      feasible. Three times around Two-Bit in a glider was what we were asking
      of ourselves and this contraption. An idiot’s dream.
    </p>
  </blockquote>
    
  <blockquote ab:speaker="Taljen">
    <p>
      <strong>Alhane:</strong> I am alone, waiting for Stringer to return from
      the next village shown on his map. It is not far, considering how far we
      have come already. I am still terrified of what is to come, but more and
      more I am finding myself afraid of what is behind. Part of me yearns to
      be back in comfortable Ta-tjenen. The trip is killing us, though my skin
      is thick this Bannk, and I would give anything to see friends again, to
      dance, to work my shifts. But now I am not all Tjenen any more. I have
      seen much that confuses me. I am suspended between two worlds. More than
      ever I am ripped apart and do not know which way I will go. Wish me luck.
    </p>
  </blockquote>

  <p>
    The cockpit was steaming, but Stringer did not pull back the canopy because
    the airflow would be disturbed and kilometers lost. The ground looked as it
    had for the last teclads, the ocean looked the same. Everything looked the
    same. Why couldn’t this planet be bigger for all its size? Now, Stringer
    thought, everything has decided to merge and get blurry. I must be sleepy.
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen felt the plane drop suddenly and then regain its altitude. She
    looked closely at Stringer but said nothing. When it happened a second
    time, she lightly took hold of her duplicate controls. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Are you all right, Stringer?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer nodded. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Yes, all right.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    But a few minutes later, he doubled over and retched, then collapsed
    completely.
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen bit her lip and grabbed the controls. She waited a moment for
    Stringer to get up, but he didn’t. They were hundreds of kilometers from
    anywhere. She couldn’t land now, but she must. Stringer remained
    motionless. Taljen squeezed her hands tightly around the stick, trying to
    decide what to do. She landed. The right wing snapped off at the tip as it
    collided with a large rock and jerked to a halt. Taljen’s head slammed
    against the front seat and she momentarily blacked out. As soon as she came
    to, she was out of the plane.
  </p>

  <p>
    Quickly she pitched the tent under a giant bush and laid Stringer in
    it. Within telclads his skin began to redden and gray sores appeared over
    his body. She kept him as cool as she could, but in his delirium he
    struggled and twisted and only increased the fever. Taljen though he would
    surely die, but by the second beclad the sores had faded and Stringer was
    quiet. She had not slept at all. Finally he awoke and sat up. Taljen
    unstoppered her flask and gave him what little water remained.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer drank slowly and coughed. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">How long?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">About two beclads. Who can tell exactly?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer handed back the water flask. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Have you
    begun evaporating some sea water?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen nodded.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Where are we?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I don’t know, Stringer, I don’t know. Certainly far
    from any place, and with a broken wing on our bird.</q> Taljen brushed away
    her tears. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">The sun is doing its best to kill us. I
    am weak and you are weaker still. It is too hot to remain alive for long
    here.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Don’t cry,</q> Stringer said, reaching out for
    her. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You did what you had to do. I appreciate
    that. You know I love you for it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen smiled. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Yes, I know.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Do you love me?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen took his hand and laughed a little, tossing back her faded hair. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">It has taken time with you, my Alien. But yes, I think
    I do. Of course.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Something in the <q>of course</q> bothered Stringer. Had it been said too
    rapidly? Too offhandedly? He turned his head away. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I don’t think I believe you.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Oh, Stringer, now is not the time to talk of it. I
    am with you, glad to die with you—if that is what will happen to us—and
    will be glad to be able to say I have come, if the saying should ever
    happen. What else do you want?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    There was a long silence. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">If we live and I find my
    friends, will you stay with me? Or will you go back to Ta-tjenen?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen laid down Stringer’s hand. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">My love, the
    Parlztlu will be over sometime next Bannk, and I will have to get
    another. That is the way life is. Do you not understand that, Unfortunate
    Alien?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer was beginning to shake, and his head hurt again. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">But I don’t want to give you up. I want you with
    me…always.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Wh—?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Her voice sounded far away to Stringer; her face was a fuzzy
    vision. Although the sun was almost overhead, the darkness came, closing in
    on all sides. He let go.
  </p>

  <p>
    This time, Stringer was unconscious longer than before. Taljen prayed to
    any god that she could think of. She propped Stringer up and forced water
    down his throat, closed her ears to his screaming, and waited. She took the
    greenery off the bamboo shoots and covered the tent with them to help keep
    it cool. Nothing worked. She was beginning to feel sick, too. This was the
    Killer Bannk. No one ever went out except for the first and last teclads,
    and here she was, sitting under the sun, past Mid-Bannk, the hottest part
    of the Bannk. All she could do was wait, most likely wait to die with
    Stringer.
  </p>

  <p>
    But once again Stringer came to, as if a superhuman defiance brought him
    back to life. His body, already thin and worn from the journey, was more
    than emaciated. His cheeks were sunk into hollows and his green eyes stared
    into space, fogged and unseeing. He ate little, moved not at all. The gray
    splotches that covered his body gradually disappeared. Taljen, at first,
    did not understand why he spoke so few words, and then she remembered how
    he had been when she first knew him, almost a Patra-Bannk earlier.
  </p>

  <p>
    When he was strong enough, fed on food collected from plants and fish, he
    began to walk and finally dismantled the glider in order to be able to tow
    it. He hardly said a word the entire time, working with Taljen in an
    embarrassing silence that she did not know how to break.
  </p>

  <p>
    When the work was finished and the glider’s wings were strapped to the
    fuselage and a simple sledge had been built to drag it, Stringer said, <q ab:speaker="Stringer">This planet is artificial.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen didn’t even respond. It was as if the sentence had flown past her
    unnoticed. Stringer studied his face, watched her eyes, and thought to
    himself: <span ab:speaker="Stringer">No, you don’t understand. What I said
    is totally outside any frame of reference that you have. You have
    discovered a world that is many time larger than you expected and which has
    no edge. But, like those villagers who thought that our glider was alive,
    to you an artificial planet does not even enter into your
    imagination.</span> Why it had entered into his own imagination, Stringer
    wasn’t sure. But the conclusion now seemed logical, inevitable, the only
    one that explained everything, and he was convinced that if he had known
    more about what planets were like, he would have thought of it the moment
    he had arrived.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Well,</q> he said in an overly distinct voice, <q ab:speaker="Stringer">let’s go. We have a long walk ahead of us.</q>
  </p>

  <blockquote ab:speaker="Stringer">
    <p>
      <strong>Entry 27:</strong> Alhane, how blind I have been! Is it a matter
      of a language that I didn’t learn properly? Is it obvious to all but me?
      Taljen claims to love me. She certainly has shown them more affection than
      I deserve. Yet, when the <q>houses must be changed,</q> she will be
      perfectly content to return to another. How could she be this way? How
      could I have expected anything else? Now I am beginning to perceive the
      cause of her ambivalence about the murder I committed when I first
      arrived at Ta-tjenen, her ambivalence about me, and yet her total
      devotion to the community as a whole. Taljen may love everyone or may
      love no one. I do not think I can tell which is the reality. Maybe
      Ta-tjenen has sorted out for itself my confusion. The Tjenens, perhaps,
      have done well by this outcome of peculiar biology—if it is the
      biology—if that causes it. As Taljen said, I might benefit from being a
      Tjenen. Who knows? If my entrance to Ta-tjenen had not started off so
      poorly, I might have found it a pleasant place to live. Ta-tjenen seems
      to be a city content with itself. Is it anything more? Perhaps you, who
      have a true love for your work, know the answer.
    </p>

    <p>
      But life is not all unfortunate, Time Keeper. I too have found the work
      to which I will devote myself. It came upon me in my sickness. Yes, a
      Patra-Bannk germ attacked my body through undefended channels. In my long
      delirium something opened up for me. It is like the feeling you get when
      you are about to wake up from a long night’s sleep. (You’ve never had
      one, have you?) A picture, a solution to a bothersome problem, arises
      from your unconscious, and it must be caught or it sinks to the bottom of
      your brain again, lost until another lucky sleep gives you a second
      chance. There have been several occasions when I almost caught it: on my
      ship coming to our world, with Taljen in my shuttle, with her again last
      Patra. Now I have caught it, finally, after my pitifully slow mind put
      the pieces together. Now I have caught it, and although our journey seems
      hopeless, I must get south to Pike and his mysterious city. Because I am
      sure that is where the answers are.
    </p>
  </blockquote>
    
  <nav><a href="twir_24.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown-bottom" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown-bottom&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_26.xhtml">Next »</a></nav></body></html>