<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:ab="http://example.org/audiobook-schema" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>The World is Round, Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="twir.css" />
  <link rel="icon" href="icon.svg" />
</head>
<body><nav><a href="twir_4.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown-top" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown-top&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_6.xhtml">Next »</a></nav><h2><div>Chapter Four</div>Introductions for Planet
  and Explorer I</h2>

  <p>
    When Hendig had first turned <em>Number Two</em> shuttlecraft inland,
    Pike’s initial reaction was one of amused curiosity. After all, even if the
    odds of finding this mythical navigator alive after twenty years were one
    in a million, Hendig, for all his dubious reasoning, had so far been
    surprisingly accurate in his predictions. Accurate enough, that is, so that
    Pike began to wonder if, in fact, he knew what he was doing.
  </p>

  <p>
    Within a few minutes of flying time, the mountain range loomed large and
    blotted out the western sky. Hendig turned parallel to the range, flew
    north, then south again. After several sweeps he slowed the plane and
    nudged Pike. <q ab:speaker="Hendig">Look there.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike strained his eyes as Hendig pushed the button that froze the
    video. High up on the mountain rested a village whose buildings were
    colored only a little differently from the mountain itself and set into the
    rock.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Are you telling me that’s where we’re going? How are
    we supposed to land?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Hendig">No, it’s just a landmark. That village is
    deserted. But look here.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike’s eyes followed Hendig’s finger to the altimeter, and he didn’t like
    what he saw. <q ab:speaker="Pike">How could they live up there? It’s eight
    or nine kilometers at least.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Hendig shrugged. <q ab:speaker="Hendig">My bronze is not to explain those
    things. Now Hendig takes us down.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike watched with relief as the altimeter dropped several kilometers as
    they descended through a new layer of clouds. The airspeed indicator was
    slowing, and after a moment more of flying south, Hendig pointed out the
    cockpit.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Hendig">Massarat ahead. We can land on the plateau.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike saw the plateau and the cleft simultaneously. It took him a few more
    moments to pick out the buildings. As if a giant had cut a shelf into the
    mountain, the plateau extended outward from the range until it abruptly
    terminated in a drop of at least a hundred meters before the mountain’s
    outward slip caught it once again. On the inner edge of the plateau, into
    the mountain itself, was cut a giant gorge running almost due west and
    losing itself in the shadows. The city: clusters of buildings hanging
    precariously on the side of the cleft, others built on the plateau, and
    still more cut into the mountain face. Even as the plane began settling,
    Pike could see the giant staircase hewn out of rock that led from the
    plateau to an unseen termination within the gorge. A strange place to eke
    out an existence, he thought.
  </p>

  <p>
    <em>Number Two</em> was almost at a dead standstill now, hovering above the
    plain. The dust sprayed up by the engines obscured their vision below. Pike
    heard a soft thump and knew they were on the ground.
  </p>

  <p>
    Immediately Hendig walked back to the weapons cabinet and began arming
    himself with knife and graser. <q ab:speaker="Hendig">Hendig may not be
    wanted here.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike, thinking there was more to this than met the eye, followed suit,
    strapping a holster across his chest. He stepped to the hatch, unlocked it,
    swung the door wide, and jumped out.
  </p>

  <p>
    A blast of hot, damp air hit him in the face at the same time that a great
    whirring sound struck his ears. The crowd was already growing as Pike
    stepped away from the hull. People ran across the plain toward the shuttle,
    others climbed down from their cliff dwellings, and more emerged from the
    darkness in the cleft. The whirring grew louder and louder. Were they
    making this sound?
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Hendig">We’re safe,</q> shouted Hendig from behind him, over
    the rising pulsations. <q ab:speaker="Hendig">This sound is good.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Now the crowd was upon them, and they were surrounded on three sides by
    people who, at first glance, might have been mistaken for humans. Suddenly,
    within a moment, the sound level died away, suddenly enough so Pike thought
    something was wrong. He stood there, rigid, watching the crowd part in
    peristaltic waves. The center of the disturbance could only be the
    wide-brimmed hat floating toward them above the sea of hands. Finally,
    after endless moments of expectation, the nearest spectators shuffled
    aside, and a gaunt, weatherbeaten man, who at once reminded Pike of a bird,
    stepped forward.
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike turned toward Hendig and saw that he held his graser outstretched,
    pointed at the newcomer. The silence was complete but for the intrusion of
    the wind that whistled through the gorge, showering dust upon them all, and
    for the intense hatred that arced across the space between the two
    men. Pike immediately convinced himself of the reality of the hatred. This
    was not a superficial hatred such as that which Stringer bore for Hendig,
    whom he regarded as no more than an oaf and a braggart, but a hatred that
    had been carefully nursed and stoked for over two decades by a man who had
    nothing but memories of a life that might have been.
  </p>

  <p>
    A moment later Pike was wondering if his analysis was correct because he
    saw Hendig lower his graser when the newcomer appeared to be unarmed, and
    even begin laughing. <q ab:speaker="Hendig">Look at this.</q> Hendig
    pointed. <q ab:speaker="Hendig">Look at this.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The other man stepped up to Hendig with a wide grin on his lips, wide
    enough so that Pike thought it would split his face in two. But it was a
    skewed grin, cockeyed, only a poor approximation of pleasure. The two men
    were now face to face, staring one another in the eyes. Suddenly, the
    newcomer grasped Hendig’s graser arm, simultaneously pulled out a knife
    which he had held concealed, and thrust it through Hendig’s neck. There was
    not the time for Pike to react; there was not even the time for Hendig to
    frown, and with his laugh still frozen on his lips, he slumped to the
    dust-covered rock of the plateau.
  </p>

  <p>
    Now the stranger began to shake convulsively from head to toe. He stared
    blankly at the body for a long time and then at Pike without saying a word,
    only shaking.
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike knelt by Hendig and confirmed the absence of a pulse. Pike screwed up
    his lips and worried for a long moment that this unfortunate incident might
    bring the mission to a premature termination. Then the obvious occurred to
    him: the newcomer was, in all probability, the navigator for which they had
    come. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Now, my good man, why don’t you tell me who you
    are?</q> he asked, thinking the question an eminently reasonable way to
    find out.
  </p>

  <p>
    The stranger started, sighed, then suddenly regained total composure. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Now that seems like a reasonable thing to ask. The
    name is Paddelack.</q> He held out his hand, palm up, in the Bitter
    fashion, but Pike was too startled by the sudden change of bearing to
    respond. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">And who are you, my gaping friend?</q>
    Paddelack asked. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">I’d suggest you close that mouth
    of yours instead of leaving it open for the sting flies to populate.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike clamped his mouth shut. He wasn’t sure about this Paddelack fellow; he
    talked too much like himself. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Pike, the name is
    Pike.…Tell me, Paddelack, did I detect some antipathy between you and Master
    Hendig?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Antipathy? Why use fancy words when simple ones
    will do? Hate, pure distilled hate is what it is. Nothing fancier than
    that.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike was at least glad to learn his initial observation had been
    accurate. <q ab:speaker="Pike">And although I gather that you were once
    navigator for my colleague, why don’t you explain the cause of this falling
    out.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack’s response was forestalled by the arrival of mats and containers
    of food brought by the cliff dwellers. The entire settlement seemed to
    burst into celebration and the noise was deafening. Paddelack motioned for
    Pike to sit down as a young creature proffered food.
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack said something to the child in a totally alien language, then
    spoke to Pike directly. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">This is my friend
    Mith.</q> Pike didn’t hear what Paddelack had said because he now noticed
    that aside from the very dark and leathery skin, the child also had six
    fingers on his hands, two of which may have been opposable thumbs. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">I see you are surprised at how human they look. So
    was I. But then I found out the differences. You’ll find out if you are
    idiotic enough to stay here that long.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike leaned back in the shade of the shuttlecraft. It was very hot, in fact
    hotter than any time or place he could remember. <q ab:speaker="Pike">But
    back to your story, please,</q> he said, speaking over the background
    noise. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Please tell me how you came to this place that
    would have the crabs screaming for mercy.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack spat on the ground and waved a finger at Hendig’s body. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">When I ran into that renegade, he souped up some
    story that he was contracted with Two-Bit Transportation to do some
    prospecting. Said he was making a run to Barythron because some astrometric
    evidence showed that something peculiar was going on. Imagine he wasn’t
    working by the books just running off like that, doubt he had a contract at
    all—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Correct.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack" class="no-close-quote">Anyway, I hopped on as
    engineer, navigator, whatever. I pretty much flopped as an engineer, never
    even got halfway through school. But nine out of ten men are suicides,
    anyway, so it doesn’t bother me too much. Certainly didn’t bother that
    idiot.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack" class="no-close-quote">Trip took about three years,
    proper time. Woke up, and what did we see? Strangest planetary system I’ve
    ever heard of. Just the sun and this giant, six hundred thousand kilometers
    across if it’s a centimeter. The only other thing is a little ball of rock,
    half the size of Two-Bit and half as far out. What it’s doing here I don’t
    know. What this monster is doing here I don’t know, either. Something’s
    mighty peculiar, although I’ve never been able to test my suspicions,
    sitting up here on this mountain.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Anyway, we impacted down here, right into the
    soup, to see what we could see. Didn’t find much, that’s for sure. No
    evidence of anything except the usual metals. So we about gave up. Then we
    found the city. <q>Daryephna,</q> they call it in these parts. Such a sweet
    sound for <q>Palace of Fear</q>—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">But Hendig told me the natives didn’t know anything
    about it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack glanced again at the body and began chewing on some tough
    food. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack" class="no-close-quote">Listening to him was like
    listening to a random-number generator; anything came out of his mouth.…Oh,
    the natives knew something about it, or about something. It’s not clear
    what they knew, how they knew it, be it by myth or Polkraitz legend, but
    they knew something. None of them had ever been there, as it’s across the
    ocean. And what an ocean! At least 150k kilometers across from here, if not
    more.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack" class="no-close-quote">So we went over to the
    city. Even from orbit it was magnificent. Well, now that I think about it,
    it could have been ugly, depending on your tastes. May as well have been a
    sculpture.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">We didn’t find too much and never discovered the
    purpose of most of that. I couldn’t quite tell if the place had been
    cleaned out or if no one had ever been there before. Like a newly built
    home. Who’s to say if someone is moving out or in? But Hendig found
    something; he showed me a piece of it. I never saw exactly where it came
    from in that city, because he picked me to come here to recruit some
    natives to help cart the stuff out. They were willing enough to help,
    probably because they could hardly understand what we wanted them to
    do. But after we got to Daryephna, the Fear started to set in. I don’t know
    exactly what it was—never felt it myself. All I know is that shortly after
    we got them in, there was quite a riot. Several people were killed. Hendig,
    who swore by Jedoval, though you’d think he was reared by Sarek, sent me to
    bring them back. But a storm blew up just as we were landing on the coast
    of Liddlefur.…You’ve never seen a storm like the ones we get here. It’s a
    bit too early in the day for them, but that sun picks up a lot of water,
    and it’s got to come down sometime. So my plane crashed. Hendig never
    bothered to come and find me. Maybe the Fear finally got him too. Most
    likely he was afraid that the natives would rip him to shreds after what
    happened at Daryephna. But soon it was too late anyway; the Freeze started
    to set in. You know they call this planet Freeze-Bake. It certainly is the
    most appropriate name for it I can think of. So, here I have been for more
    than twenty years, almost a native by this time.</q> Paddelack finished
    with a shiver and stared inwardly at himself.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">I suppose I can understand your feelings for
    Hendig,</q> said Pike. <q ab:speaker="Pike">It is difficult to blame you
    for killing him.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack just stared at the ground. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">I…didn’t
    know what to do. There he was, after twenty years. He left me here but now
    he was my way off. I didn’t know what to do. And then my body did it, by
    itself, my whole body.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Well, you’re forgiven. Tell me, what happened to the
    charts?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack’s attention was distracted by Mith’s insistent tugging at his
    shoulder. He glanced in the direction the child was motioning and his eyes
    widened. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Gostum again,</q> he said as he pointed
    out to Pike several intruders riding through the cleft atop tall, muscular
    animals whose long hairs draped over the riders’ legs. They were dressed
    in, of all things, black, and had a single orange stripe crossing their
    chests. As they drew nearer the noise level abated and the festivities
    ground to a halt. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">What do they want this
    time?</q> Paddelack asked himself. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">More food?
    Supplies? Parasites.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Who are they?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Untrusted neighbors. Whatever they want, you can
    be sure your presence is now noted for future reference.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The riders were soon off without any disturbance and the celebrations
    continued as if never interrupted. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Back to the charts,
    please,</q> Pike insisted.
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack laughed. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Lost in the crash, of
    course.…Now, if you’re smart, you’ll get off this planet as soon as you
    can. I don’t care how bizarre it is; it’s not worth your staying on.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike shook his head resolutely. <q ab:speaker="Pike">No. I am afraid we
    didn’t come here just to rescue you, and I won’t go until I get to that
    city.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Now Paddelack began shaking again, as he had when he faced off
    Hendig. Suddenly he shot himself at Pike and shook him violently by the
    shoulders. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">You must promise to get me off this
    planet! I’ll do anything you want! I’ll follow you anywhere! But you must
    promised to get me off as soon as you can!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike gently took Paddelack’s hands away from his neck. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Stop it. Stop it.</q> Paddelack fell back onto the mat,
    still racked with sobs. The crowd around them stared curiously. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Yes, of course. You’re as good as off. Stick with me and
    you’ll be away from Freeze-Dried, or whatever you called it, as soon as I
    am. Now, why don’t you tell me why this place is so unbearable? It might be
    good information to have.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack picked up a pick of a leathery-looking vegetable and offered some
    to Pike. Pike refused; Mith grabbed it and ran off into the surrounding
    crowd.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">I wouldn’t worry about them,</q> Paddelack said,
    running a hand through his closely cropped gray hair. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">They’re the friendliest bunch I’ve ever met. It’s
    their society that does it, I think. It’s not they who should worry you,
    but this planet itself.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">It seems rather big, somewhat damp, and
    extraordinarily hot, but I think one might adjust to it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Hah!</q> Paddelack snorted. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">So you’ve noticed it’s <q>somewhat damp</q> and
    <q>extraordinarily hot</q> up here. Well, then, think of what it’s like
    down there—</q> Paddelack pointed in the direction of the coast. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Oh, yes, we live up here in the mountains mostly
    because it’s <q>pleasant.</q> But what about when you want to eat? Then
    there’s the two-hundred-kilometer trek to the coast for some fish, through
    the slimiest, sweatiest jungle you’ve ever seen that will, as likely as
    not, kill you before you get there. But I shouldn’t complain too
    much. Tomorrow will be much hotter. This is the shortest day, and except in
    the middle two months or less, we can get down to the coast without serious
    loss of life. Around midyear it’s impossible. Makes me wish for
    nighttime. Right now there’s only a skeleton crew down at Liddlefur—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">I’m not following you, Paddelack. Will you slow down?
    Tell me again why you don’t live at the coast.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">I told you, it’s too hot there in the middle of
    the day. Next year, tomorrow, it will be too hot to go down there at all,
    except for the very beginning and end of the day. So we stay up here,
    getting ready for night. After all, night starts in a couple of months, and
    we get ready for it early so there won’t be any foul-ups. You don’t want
    foul-ups on Freeze-Bake.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike shook his head and asked for some water. <q ab:speaker="Pike">What do
    you mean, <q>night starts in a couple of months</q>? What do you mean,
    <q>today is the shortest day</q>? Is it winter?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">In a way,</q> Paddelack replied, cocking his head
    and pinching his nose. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">You really don’t
    understand, do you? Well, turn around and look at that sun.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike, indeed, could hardly make out the yellow ball weaving its way between
    clouds.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Have you seen that sun move since you showed
    up?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">I haven’t been watching.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Well, sir explorer, take a guess why it is so hot
    down here. Never mind, I’ll answer that. The sun takes so long to move,
    that’s why, pure and simple. It greenhouses awful down here. I mean, they
    used to tell me that ground equilibrates pretty fast and won’t get much
    hotter if you heat it for a month rather than a day, but the
    greenhouse—that’s what really does it. Those clouds trap a lot of
    heat. Directly beneath that sun it may shoot up to several hundred, for all
    I know. But that’s only half the story. When that sun goes down, it stays
    down for more than six of your lousy Two-Bit months. First the rains come
    when it starts getting cool enough for this supersaturated atmosphere to
    begin dumping its horde. Then the winds come, winds that make a Bitter
    hurricane look like a dust devil. And by the time the winds stop, the sun
    is long gone. And by then it’s gotten real cold. Nobody can talk about it
    much, because anyone who has so little of a brain to go out at night dies
    within seconds if he isn’t dressed to the hilt. Even then you might have an
    hour. Even then I imagine you can’t see anything but what the stars
    permit—if the stars exist any more. Haven’t seen one in years! Been told the
    oceans freeze down to who knows how far, but they do freeze, that I can
    tell you, and legend even has the air freezing out on occasion. Now you
    understand why I—and everyone else on this Godforsaken planet—am a fanatic
    about wanting to get off.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    For perhaps the first time in his life, Pike was silenced for more than a
    complete second, but he soon recovered. <q ab:speaker="Pike">So where can
    you live at night?</q> he asked.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">In the mountains.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">How can that help?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Hot air rises, remember.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">It gets that cold?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Colder than that; we live underground.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike shook his head and fell silent once more.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Oh, you have no idea how much that slow, slow
    rotation period affects every little bit of life on this planet. Try
    explaining to these people the difference between a day and a year. It just
    doesn’t click in their heads, not quite. We divide up our year, one
    revolution around the sun, into months and days and base our calendar on
    that. But what if your day is a year long? Then what do you do? Especially
    if you don’t have a moon. The calendar becomes almost arbitrary. Here they
    happen to count in twelves: twelve teclads to a full <q>day</q> or
    <q>year,</q> which makes a teclad something over a month. Twelve beclads to
    a teclad, so a beclad is about three of our days. One beclad is one hundred
    forty-four telclads, making a telclad about half an hour. Each telclad is
    twelve belclads, so a belclad is about two minutes. There are one hundred
    forty-four clads to a belclad, giving very nearly a second for a clad. Just
    remember the prefixes and you’ll stay confused. I trust I make myself
    obscure.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">You do.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Look, give me something to write with.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike, not understanding exactly what Paddelack was up to, fished a
    never-absent note pad and stylus from his belt and handed them over.
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack began writing. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">These values are only
    approximate and not to be taken as God’s word. Here.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike glanced at the paper and saw:
  </p>

  <table>
    <tr><td>1 clad</td><td>———</td><td>1 second</td></tr>
    <tr><td>1 belclad</td><td>———</td><td>2 minutes +</td></tr>
    <tr><td>1 telclad</td><td>———</td><td>30 minutes −</td></tr>
    <tr><td>1 beclad</td><td>———</td><td>3 days −</td></tr>
    <tr><td>1 telclad</td><td>———</td><td>1 month +</td></tr>
  </table>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">What am I going to do with this?</q> he asked.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">You’ll need it if you’re fool enough to stay here
    any longer,</q> said Paddelack. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Look, what I was
    trying to tell you is that there is incredibly little external basis for
    their calendar here. They seem to have an internal cycle, inherited from
    their original planet, no doubt, which makes the beclad a natural
    period. But that doesn’t mean day to them at all. When you say <q>day</q>
    you are implying a relationship that doesn’t exist here. Day tells you when
    to get up and go to bed and when it’s dark and light. That’s a year
    here. You get up and go to bed on your own. Not only that, but we expect
    that after a year, everything starts over again the way it was: stars,
    calendar, seasons, everything. Stars. Do they exist? Seasons? They’re
    buried under the days. Seven days before everything starts over
    again. Seven cockeyed days of varying lengths. Is that seven seasons? If
    so, I suppose that means this planet must be tilted to produce such an
    insane effect. I don’t know. Don’t you understand?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike was getting very confused. <q ab:speaker="Pike">I’m afraid I will just
    have to see for myself.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">You will if you are stupid enough to stay here
    another clad. I was hoping my little talk would have dissuaded you.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">No,</q> Pike said crumbling up the table Paddelack had
    written, <q ab:speaker="Pike">I am afraid I am going to Daryephna
    first.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Ahh, idiot.</q> Paddelack got up then.
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike couldn’t help staring at this man. He was a peculiar sight. Though he
    must have been around fifty, owing to the time dilations involved in
    getting to and from Hendig’s Freeze-Baked planet, and his hair was gray and
    his skin worn, Paddelack’s taut muscles and bony frame were plainly visible
    through the featureless suit that covered his entire body save for his
    hands and his face.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Don’t you get hot in that thing?</q> Pike asked.
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack laughed. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Insulation. Made from
    plants. Protects you from the heat. Also sort of a natural desiccant. Dry
    it out over some coals and it will suck up a lot of water—your sweat. You
    see, down below the mountain, it’s too humid for you to sweat freely. Your
    pores get clogged, your skin infected, and you rot. So you wear a
    diaper—all over. Of course, you don’t want to suck up the atmosphere, too,
    so the outer surface is waxy with enough holes to breathe. You have to be
    zero-defects on Freeze-Bake or you don’t survive. These suits aren’t
    strictly necessary up here but they help you from getting too burned.…Now,
    let’s join the celebration of your arrival.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The natives were in a festive mood, exactly why Pike never found out. The
    pulsating roar that had greeted him and Hendig upon their arrival had
    hardly abated since. Dancing, singing, playing, all at once struck Pike as
    contradictory to the environment Paddelack had described. The Liddlefurans,
    named for the city on the coast, were fascinated by Pike’s sidearms and
    amazed when he blasted away a boulder from the edge of the plateau to help
    clear a new path for them. They insisted that Pike take them for shuttle
    rides, and he obliged, giving each group a quick trip to the coast and
    back.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Well,</q> Paddelack said after half a dozen
    trips. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">You’re a hero. Enjoy it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">I will. Of that you can be assured.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Finally, after hours, Pike sought out Paddelack to ask him if they could
    put a halt to the merriment. Just as he approached the older man, Paddelack
    glanced into the gorge.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Gostum! Back again! This can’t be good.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike saw a dozen men and women galloping through the cleft, scattering the
    crowd in all directions.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">I told you your presence would be noted. I
    suggest you use that graser of yours, and use it well.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike drew his graser, took quick aim, and fired at the nearest rider. The
    Gostum fell, but Pike didn’t have time to fire again. He stood up quickly
    and just as quickly saw a flash in the hands of a second rider, a whiz
    through the air, and a wound open on his arm. He looked pleadingly toward
    Paddelack, whose arm was in the midst of hurling a knife. But the hand
    jerked backward just before release and the knife clattered to the ground,
    far short of its target. Pike felt dizzy and tumbled toward the ground. He
    did not see what happened to Paddelack, nor did he expect to see him again.
  </p>

  <nav><a href="twir_4.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown-bottom" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown-bottom&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_6.xhtml">Next »</a></nav></body></html>