<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:ab="http://example.org/audiobook-schema" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>The World is Round, Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="twir.css" />
  <link rel="icon" href="icon.svg" />
</head>
<body><nav><a href="twir_21.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_23.xhtml">Next »</a></nav><h2><div>Chapter Twenty-One</div>Daybreak in the
  South: Other Journeys Begin</h2>

  <p>
    As was his duty, Pike stood on the windswept balcony from which he had
    first witnessed the great western desert. His cape blew violently behind
    him, tangling with that of Effrulyn, who held the Angles in thickly gloved
    hands. Fara-Ny, bundled up in great quantities of clothing, was
    unrecognizable. Karrxlyn stood by, too, only his eyes visible, and also one
    of the astronomers, who had one hand on a mounted stick and one eye on the
    mountaintops, kilometers above their heads. When the tip of the mountain
    turned white, the astronomer brought his attention to his transit and fixed
    his eye to the crosspiece.
  </p>

  <p>
    The wait was agonizing. Eventually the astronomer mumbled, <q ab:speaker="Gostum astronomer">I think that might be it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">What was that?</q> Pike shouted into the roaring wind.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Gostum astronomer">I said, I think that might be it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">You’re not sure?</q> Effrulyn asked.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Gostum astronomer">It might just be a diffraction off the
    desert.…Now, is that it? No, maybe now…</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">Oh, come on. Pick a time.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The astronomer paid no attention to Effrulyn. Suddenly everyone exclaimed
    at once: <q ab:speaker="Pike, Effrulyn, Fara-Ny, and Karrxlyn together">Yes, there it is!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The astronomer looked up, startled. <q ab:speaker="Gostum astronomer">Yes,
    I guess so.</q> He cupped his eye to his mouth and called down the corridor
    that opened behind them: <q ab:speaker="Gostum     astronomer"><em>Sunrise!</em></q> The call was relayed to the great hall
    and the clocks were set.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Gostum">The clocks are set!</q> came the answering call.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">How much was the new clock off?</q> Effrulyn
    asked.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Gostum astronomer">What was the error?</q> the astronomer
    called.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Gostum">Quarter of a beclad plus quarter of a telclad!</q>
    came the distant answer.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Gostum astronomer">Not good,</q> the astronomer said.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">But,</q> Effrulyn asked, <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">by how much is the old master clock in error?</q>
    Again the call was sent after a moment the answer received.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Gostum">A full beclad plus a telclad.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">So let us look at these records.</q> Effrulyn
    snatched the sheets the astronomer had kept since early Patra, when the
    pendulum clock had been finished. <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">Here is where
    the final adjustments were made and the new clock set to the old, about a
    quarter of the way into the Patra. Now we see a progressive discrepancy
    between the old clock and the new as the Patra wears on. The discrepancy
    seems more or less linear, so let us assume that the old one was off by a
    quarter of a beclad when the final set on the new one was made. That means
    the remaining quarter of a telclad is the error in the new. Not bad, I’d
    say. But then this whole discussion is meaningless because it assumes that
    the sun tells some metaphysical absolute time, and I see little
    justification for putting so much confidence in the physical world. So you
    astronomers and clockmakers can do as you will.</q> Effrulyn smiled at the
    frowning astronomer and walked inside.
  </p>

  <p>
    Later, when he passed through the great hall, the old clock had been
    removed, leaving the new pendulum clock on the dais alone, clacking away to
    disturb his thoughts.
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    The sun was not yet quite up and the sky was gray-clear, but that only made
    it seem colder to Paddelack as he tugged and yanked the stubborn grask
    along the road to Massarat. Finally the stupid animal refused to budge a
    centimeter. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">You think I like this, animal?</q>
    Paddelack yelled. The grask didn’t answer, just knelt where it
    was. Paddelack wasn’t in the mood to argue. He took a beclad’s worth of
    provisions from the animal’s back. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Your fur
    should keep you warm! Bah!</q> He left the grask there.
  </p>

  <p>
    The terminator was not a good place to be, Paddelack decided for the second
    time as he trudged on through the snow, the terminator where the cold
    hemisphere met the warm there and giant air masses clashed head-on. Of
    course, if the great Gostum debate didn’t finally decide that the planet
    was round, they would never begin to understand how weather worked—if it
    was possible to understand weather at all.
  </p>

  <p>
    As he entered the gorge that cut through the mountain, Paddelack was first
    staggered, then felled, by winds roaring through at hurricane force. When
    he eventually managed to regain his feet while clinging to a rock, he could
    see that the highest peaks gleamed white. Soon the shadow began dropping
    away from the Massarat range, the light invaded the crags, and the desert
    became bright with the tangential rays of the rising sun. Paddelack stood
    and watched it happen, stubbornly slow. It happened so slowly that after
    the first beam flashing into his eyes, Paddelack swore that he could count
    the seconds before it crawled from the tip of his bird-beaked nose, across
    the snout of his oversized parka, and down his skinny legs to the heels of
    his tightly tied boots. He whistled through his teeth, waved to the newborn
    sun, and trudged on his way.
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    When Paddelack reached Massarat, no one was outside to greet him. Well, he
    couldn’t blame them, could he? This he thought as he was blown over again
    by the wind and received his <em>n</em>th bruise—where <em>n</em> is a very
    large number. Paddelack climbed the iced-over steps, slipping twice, and
    pulled the bell rope. Soon somebody opened the door a crack, and a single
    eyeball peered out at him, gazing down the snout of his hood. <q ab:speaker="Liddlefuran gatekeeper">Paddelack!</q> the voice exclaimed
    after the delayed recognition. <q ab:speaker="Liddlefuran gatekeeper">We
    never expected to see you again! We thought you’d found the Edge or the
    Bucket of Winds.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Well, I’m back. Don’t just stand there, let me
    in! Or I’ll give you a fustigation that you’ll never forget!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The door swung wide, and Paddelack stepped in to see a torch being held
    over his head and a stout man scrutinizing his face. <q ab:speaker="Liddlefuran gatekeeper">Paddelack, Returned, you look pretty
    much as you were.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">What did you expect, that I’d turned into a
    Gostum? Well, come on, get me something hot to drink—scalding, mind
    you. I’m more dead than alive at the moment…One thing more: get the
    nestrexam together.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Soon Paddelack was standing, still in his parka and with a hot drink cupped
    in his hands, in the middle of the nestrexam’s ancient assembly room, the
    largest of the communal rooms that dated from the age of the Polkraitz
    themselves. He addressed the large crowd that had gathered, briefly
    retelling what had happened since he and Pike had returned for <em>Number
    Two</em>. His face was still dirty and scarred from his trek over forty
    impossible kilometers during the most impossible part of the Patra-Bannk,
    and the merriment that he had feigned upon his miraculous arrival had
    vanished completely and absolutely.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Soon,</q> he said, <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">the
    Gostum will be arriving at our gate. They will try to enlist you in a war
    they are planning against Triesk—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Liddlefuran">Triesk?</q> shouted a voice buried in the
    crowd.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Certainly you have heard of Triesk, the ancient
    Polkraitz city of the north.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Liddlefuran">Ah, yes. It is far away, isn’t it? Too far away
    to have a war against.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">No,</q> Paddelack replied with a shake of his
    head. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">The Gostum not only have a way of getting
    there but have the help of the Alien, Pike.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Vardyen, one of the old leaders of the Liddlefurans, stepped forward. He
    had a square jaw and tufted gray hair. <q ab:speaker="Vardyen">The same
    Polkraitz is Returned on the Golun-Patra? The same who cleared the path and
    escaped the Gostum fortress and visited the forbidden city across the
    ocean?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">The same,</q> Paddelack reluctantly admitted.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Vardyen">Hmm, a man worth heeding, one would think,
    Paddelack. He is our friend.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">No. You cannot help him in this war.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Vardyen thought a moment. <q ab:speaker="Vardyen">I think you have not told
    us the cause.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">The Gostum think there are rockets at Triesk to
    take us all from Patra-Bannk, and they believe that Pike will show us how
    to use them.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Vardyen">If Pike is giving his aid in their quest, then he
    must believe them.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">But there is no definite proof, just some spy’s
    word. You will all be killed. It is pointless, senseless, don’t you
    understand?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Vardyen scratched his head. <q ab:speaker="Vardyen">And what happens when
    the Gostum come knocking at our door? What do you expect us to do, then? To
    fight with them or against them, Paddelack Wise One, we are dead either
    way.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack was silenced and sat down. After a few minutes he stood up
    again. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">I have a hunch. Let us reconvene after
    I’ve checked it out. Do you agree?</q> Vardyen nodded and Paddelack walked
    out of the room. At the door he was accosted by his little friend Mith. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Come on, Mith,</q> he said, taking the boy’s
    hand. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Let’s see what we can find.</q>
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    Mith and Paddelack searched for so many telclads on end that it was closer
    to a beclad. Other than finding another way out of Massarat, Paddelack did
    not know what he had expected to uncover. They passed systematically
    through the communal rooms, the sleeping quarters, the workshops, the
    furnace rooms, all of which were familiar to Paddelack. They saw nothing,
    and no one could report any exit. They continued downward. An old wooden
    ladder marked the lowest point at which Paddelack had ever been, yet there
    was still more to Massarat. The air was musky, and the slightest sound
    caused Paddelack and Mith to turn around, startled.
  </p>

  <p>
    After a beclad of fruitless searching, Paddelack was still convinced that
    there must be another way out of Massarat so that they could escape the
    Gostum if need be. When he finally found the exit, it was not what he had
    expected. The chamber was piled with litter, so old and rotted that it was
    half dust. The floor was strewn with loose rock, blown from the walls
    carved by the Polkraitz. A small furry animal scurried out from beneath the
    trash pile, and he kicked at it. It disappeared under a cracked slab and he
    pushed the cleaved pieces aside. Mith knelt with the lantern as Paddelack
    ran his finger around a hole whose existence, like most things in the
    world, seemed to have been forgotten at some point in the last
    millennium. They found concentric ridges of melted and rehardened metal,
    the kind of layers formed when one tries to cut through a piece of iron
    with a blowtorch whose flame isn’t strong enough.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Someone worked very hard to get through this,</q>
    Paddelack muttered as he dropped a piece of rock into the hole. It
    clattered not far below. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">I’m going down. Get me a
    long rope, Mith.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Soon they had a rope fastened to a solid support, and Paddelack lowered
    himself through the hole. Five meters down, no more, he stopped, toes
    touching bottom followed by heels.
  </p>

  <p>
    He passed the lantern around. Above his head were four giant, flat
    hexagons. By his feet were four more. Connecting the top set to the bottom
    were thin rods on the perimeters of the hexagons, surely not strong enough
    to support what was above. As he neared one of the plates, the iron
    medallion that he had always worn was snatched from his neck and stuck fast
    to the hexagon. Paddelack tried hard to yank the medallion away, but it
    wouldn’t bulge. He walked forward a few steps until he met a wall blocking
    his way, but he found he could circle around it until he met another. He
    continued in this way, around walls and under, until he met another space
    with more giant hexagons on floor and ceiling. It was like a giant maze, a
    honeycomb. A space opened at his feet and he could see a wall below, as
    well as another unit of the construction.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Get me some paint!</q> he yelled up to Mith, his
    crabby tenor resonating down the honeycombs. It was a telclad before he had
    the paint in his hands and then marked his location. Mith held the rope as
    Paddelack dropped down to the lower level. Still another level down and
    several honeycombs away, Paddelack found a tube which sloped downward at a
    shallow angle. As always when confronted with a gateway, he did not
    hesitate. He jumped in and slid down, spiraling around with short pushes of
    his hands. If the tunnel was in actuality made for a wheeled device, it
    nonetheless made a serviceable sliding board.
  </p>

  <p>
    At the bottom he emerged onto a wide concourse. He sighed. This time there
    was a room nearby. At least it had a door in it and sat in the middle of
    the otherwise empty concourse. Inside it was light. Naturally? At his feet
    was—nothing. He shot back to the door. Then he realized how stupid he was
    being; obviously, since he hadn’t fallen through, the floor was
    solid. Below, spaced about the edge of the floor, beyond the <q>glass</q>
    were seven or eight giant cylinders, each several meters long, pointing
    down into the blackness.
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack sat on the nonexistent floor and sighed again. At first he had
    though that finding the hole under Massarat was the sheerest of luck, one
    chance in a million. But then, for twenty years he had assumed that the
    planet might be some kind of shell, and in that case, the shell had to be
    beneath everything, and so the fact that it was indeed below Massarat
    should have come as no surprise.
  </p>

  <p>
    However, he still faced another problem. Last Bannk at Daryephna, Pike had
    done his best to convince him that they had not come through the shell,
    that if the planet was a shell, it was a very thick one. Paddelack’s only
    alternative—improbable as it seemed—had been that the planet was somehow
    natural. But now, Paddelack decided, he had just come through the shell. He
    had seen the inner structure itself. He <em>was</em> underneath now, except
    for this thin floor. And there <em>was</em> still gravity, more than one
    Two-Bit gravity, much too much for even a planet-sized floor to produce. So
    his initial reaction had been, after all, correct: the planet was not a
    shell ten thousand kilometers thick.
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack rose to his feet and readied himself for the long climb up the
    tube. As he left the clear floor and circular room, he glanced over his
    shoulder at the blackness below his feet. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Something is down there,</q> he said aloud, <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">And it’s mighty big. Maybe that’s where all the
    people are.</q>
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">Commander,</q> an angry Karrxlyn said to Pike a
    beclad later, <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">we have been to Massarat to request
    aid from the Liddlefurans, but they refuse to come out of hiding. What
    should be done?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Wait for them.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">In the wind and cold?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Do it! We will starve them out. No need to use
    force. In the meantime, I want to go to Triesk to deliver an ultimatum.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">Do you think it is a good idea? Triesk is a
    dangerous place for Gostum. Wait at least until we hear from the spy, a
    Trieskan who is to meet one of our men within the beclad.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">All right. Has word been passed to the north to begin
    the search for new recruits?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">It is being done now.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Good. Send out parties from Pant, Sect, all the other
    places. Do it quickly before the Bannk gets hot. We’ll need everybody we
    can get. Now, I want to see the stala myself, as soon as possible.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">You will not desert us, Commander, I trust.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The statement was unexpected. Pike paused and put his hand on Karrxlyn’s
    shoulder. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Never doubt me, or you will regret it. Your
    cause is mine. I will save the Gostum from Patra-Bannk, get the ships, and
    teach you how to use them. I am Commander, am I not? Yes, I am
    Commander. However, I do want to see the stala. I have my own work to
    do.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Karrxlyn smiled but with a hint of doubt. <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">Good. Then I suggest you wait out the beclad; the
    winds will have quieted a bit and the trip will be slightly
    easier. Effrulyn can take you. He does little enough around here.</q>
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    Pike and his escort were almost upon the stala before he realized that they
    had arrived at their destination. He hopped off the kneeling grask,
    wondering what such a thing was doing in the middle of an orange desert,
    surrounded by walkways that led off to nowhere. What could the Polkraitz
    have had in mind by putting it there?
  </p>

  <p>
    Inside, he was only half surprised at what he found. Effrulyn walked up
    behind him and pointed out two spots on the map.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">Because of the Polkraitz chart, many believe the
    lower point is Konndjlan and the upper is Triesk, and that of Pant in
    between. I am skeptical.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike eyed the two dots, separated on this map by a ruler’s length, but
    still one hundred thousand kilometers apart. <q ab:speaker="Pike">How come
    you are skeptical?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">One sees a point, one presses a bar, one emerges
    elsewhere. The identification of the Elsewhere is nontrivial. Does it
    correspond to a dot? How does one know? How does one know whether he is
    north or south or east or west? By the sun only, if one chooses to believe
    the world is bent. I can tell you which bar to press to get to Triesk; that
    one is right here, but as to exactly which dot represents Triesk, if any,
    that is another story. Again, because of the old chart, Triesk is a
    well-behaved case; others are singularly pathological.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike nodded as he saw Effrulyn’s finger point to the Triesk bar. His hand
    wavered above it, undecided.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">I take it you have been warned against going to
    Triesk.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Yes, I won’t,</q> Pike said absently. <q ab:speaker="Pike">But  must go elsewhere…to a place called Neberdjer.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">I know of no such place.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">This bar, here.</q> How Pike knew this, he wasn’t
    sure.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">Are you certain?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Yes. The word is in my head. I don’t know why. I think
    the secret of the metallic hydrogen may be there. I must go and see.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">The Fear is present at most of these Elsewheres,
    that one in particular. We never go there under any circumstances.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike surveyed the rows of bars. <q ab:speaker="Pike">There aren’t many
    places to go from here.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Effrulyn nodded. <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">And I have been told that most of
    these bars do nothing at all.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Well, then, the choice is clear.</q> He touched the
    Neberdjer bar and a door on his left slid open. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Will
    you come?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Effrulyn scowled. <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">I have more important things to
    do. If you will excuse me, I must get back to my lucubrations.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Then I will go alone. Get me my pack.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Effrulyn did so. Pike checked everything, shouldered the pack, and walked
    into the waiting room. <q ab:speaker="Pike">I will be back within several
    beclads at the latest. Until then, I hope your lucubrations prove
    fruitful…</q> The door slid shut and he disappeared.
  </p>

  <nav><a href="twir_21.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_23.xhtml">Next »</a></nav></body></html>