<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:ab="http://example.org/audiobook-schema" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>The World is Round, Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="twir.css" />
  <link rel="icon" href="icon.svg" />
</head>
<body><nav><a href="twir_8.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown-top" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown-top&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_10.xhtml">Next »</a></nav><h2><div>Chapter Eight</div>The Treasure Chest</h2>

  <p>
    The walls of Massarat towered above them, dull gray shadowed with black. As
    they rode through the giant cleft that cut almost due west through the
    mountain, Pike slowed his grask to a loping walk. He looked behind him and
    saw only Paddelack and Barbalan in his wake. A large sigh escaped from his
    lungs and he smiled. <q ab:speaker="Pike">The Gostum will think twice
    before tangling with us again. I’m sure of that.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack laughed with a scowl. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Don’t be. We had
    surprise, weapons they had never seen—and one of them on our side. And
    still it was lucky. But you’re right; they will remember us.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike took the bend that led to the east end of the gorge. All at once the
    walls lost their dullness as flecks of granite and mica gleamed in the rays
    of the sun shining directly before them. Pike shielded his eyes; his shadow
    trailed behind him, providing cover for Barbalan. Now he could see
    <em>Number Two</em> ahead of them. The shuttle seemed undisturbed, exactly
    as they had left it more than two unmeasured weeks before.
  </p>

  <p>
    When he neared the edge of the plateau, where the shuttle was resting, he
    saw something that at first he could not believe. His thoughts flashed back
    to the great desert he had seen from Konndjlan. There he had no scale, no
    way to judge distance; now he had one. He was looking at the ocean. The
    only reason he knew it was the ocean was because of the change of color at
    the indistinct coastline. Nearer, the color became greener, more so as the
    mountain began, and then less so as the altitude increased. Farther, the
    water merged with the clouds at an invisible horizon. Paddelack had told
    him that the ocean was two hundred kilometers distant, and now he was
    seeing—how many times that far? There was really no way to tell; the sight
    was incredibly foreshortened and all perspective nonexistent. Thus his
    scale was incomplete. Once again Pike raised his fist at Patra-Bannk.
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike dismounted and Barbalan did likewise, but Paddelack stayed upon his
    grask. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">I’m going to round up a tender for the
    animals,</q> he said. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Be back shortly.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Hurry up!</q> Pike shouted as his companion gathered
    the reins of the grask and led the animals toward the cleft. <q ab:speaker="Pike">In you go,</q> he continued to Barbalan as he opened the
    hatch and motioned to the door. Inside, he sat her down at one of the
    consoles, found a pack of liet nuts, opened it, and held out a handful for
    her. She took them and chewed quietly. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Let me see that
    shoulder of yours.</q> No response. Pike took a knife from storage and cut
    away the ragged material. <q ab:speaker="Pike">That’s quite a cut you’ve
    got there,</q> he said, applying the ultracleaner to the wound. <q ab:speaker="Pike">But don’t worry, I’ve fixed a few wounds in my time.</q>
    Pike unconsciously ran his thumb down the scar on his own face, then took
    the optical suture from its cabinet.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">It’s too bad we can’t talk to each other,</q> he
    said. <q ab:speaker="Pike">I’d like to talk to you. You’re quite a woman,
    do you know that? Probably not, I’d say. You don’t even realize I’m telling
    you this.</q> Pike sighed. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Well, this should do
    you.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack climbed in at the moment with the boy Mith clinging to his
    shirt. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Looks like you’ve patched her up pretty
    well. She’ll heal quickly; everyone around here does…you should’ve seen the
    folks back there when I came in. <q>You escaped from Konndjlan!</q> they
    said. <q>Both of us and another,</q> I said back. <q>Remarkable!
    Impossible! The same man who cleared the path?…</q></q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">So the Gostum aren’t the only ones who will remember
    us.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">You’re absolutely right. They wanted to feast us
    again, but I told them we were in a hurry.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Good. Well, are you ready?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Ready for what, exactly?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike did not answer but instead made a check of the message records. <q ab:speaker="Pike">There is nothing here from Valyavar and Stringer, it
    seems.…No beacon, either.…<em>Crimson</em>, come in. Stringer, Val, are you
    there?…On board message recorder, anything?…</q> Pike turned around. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Nothing.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Will you search?</q> asked Paddelack.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Search where? The whole planet? And after weeks of
    being out of touch? They could be anywhere. No, we won’t search. It seems
    that we are on our own.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Still plan on going to Daryephna? Don’t ask me to
    show you the way. I doubt I could hit it closer than twenty-five thousand
    kilometers; it’s been a long time.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike smiled, took the Gostum map from his hood, and unfolded it on the
    cabin floor. A corner ripped where the dead guard’s blood had glued it
    together. Pike pointed his finger at the spot he guessed to be Massarat,
    then moved it northeast across the expanse of blue that rent a large gap
    between two continents. At a large symbol, his finger stopped. Nothing else
    was near the mark, clearly the most prominent point on that half of the
    map.
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack nodded with a sigh. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">You guessed
    right. That one’s Daryephna. Those few others? Who knows? Ink drops,
    maybe.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Barbalan winced at the one word in her own language.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">You see, it does mean something to these
    people.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">What? Would you tell me?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack relayed the message to the girl.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">There is a story,</q> Barbalan replied, <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">that when the Polkraitz left Patra-Bannk, they stored
    their greatest treasure in Daryephna. They vowed to return and collect it
    in some future beclad, but to prevent anyone from taking it, they put a
    curse on the city. That is why no one other than Polkraitz can enter.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">When will they return?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Barbalan glanced at Pike standing above her. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Some
    say during the Golun-Patra. And this is the twelfth Golun-Patra.</q> When
    Pike heard this he laughed, but Barbalan calmly continued. <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">However, the Gostum are a practical people, if
    nothing else, unlike their Liddlefuran neighbors. We are not going to wait
    forever for the Polkraitz and are finding other ways to survive—or to leave
    Patra-Bannk, if that is possible.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Which brings us to the Trieskan rockets. Tell me, does
    she really believe that the Trieskans are building rockets? If their
    technology is at the same level that we saw at Konndjlan, then you must
    know that is impossible. Even Jedoval would never try to make up a story
    like that.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Once again Barbalan answered through Paddelack. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Does it really matter?</q> She shrugged. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">If they are building anything that will improve the
    life of my people, we should know about it, don’t you think? Life on
    Patra-Bannk is difficult. If rockets are being built that would take us to
    another world, then it would be worth risking our lives. Even if they
    haven’t built them yet but have the Polkraitz plans, it would be worth
    it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">What does she mean?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">The largest Polkraitz camp was originally at
    Triesk. Maybe they left plans or rockets there and the Trieskans have
    figured them out.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike smiled. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Now we are beginning to get a more
    reasonable story. Have you tried asking them for help?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">I have been told the attempt was made but
    failed. Gostum and Trieskans long ago were friends, but since almost as
    long, enemies. That is why, when you were seen at Massarat, you were taken
    to Konndjlan. It was thought you might help.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Which brings us full circle: if they want help, they
    must know what is going on one hundred thousand kilometers away. How? That
    is a nontrivial distance even by our standards.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Barbalan spoke in her calm voice after Paddelack translated Pike’s
    question. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">I am not one of the Fairtalian, and
    therefore not privileged to know how the information is obtained. I have
    heard that even the Fairtalian do not understand the process and that the
    method is magic.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">So that’s that,</q> grunted Pike, popping a liet nut
    into his mouth. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Once magic is invoked, I don’t think
    there is anything that I can say about it, is there?</q> He yawned. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Get us a course to Daryephna. Remember to stop at the
    <em>Crimson</em> for refueling. Will you do that, Paddy?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">First I want to show you something.</q> Paddelack
    sat down in the pilot’s position. Despite twenty-odd years without
    practice, he proved himself to be a good pilot, and soon they were
    off. Within a few minutes they broke through the lower clouds and passed
    the old settlement Hendig had shown Pike earlier. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Do you know why that settlement’s deserted?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">No,</q> Pike said. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Hendig said it
    wasn’t his bronze.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Not mine, either. I do have a guess. You’ve
    noticed how hot it is on Patra-Bannk. That means the atmosphere is very
    high, breathable to a great altitude. Suppose somebody went up there, found
    the temperature to his liking, and started a settlement. Then night
    comes. Gets so cold that atmosphere shrinks and collapses. Everyone dies
    because there is no air. That’s my theory, but I don’t know much about that
    stuff, so shoot it full of holes if you want.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">An interesting theory,</q> Pike said. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Well, I’m going to get some sleep. It’s been a long
    day.</q>
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    At first it looked as if it might be just a mountain peak beyond the distant
    horizon. That was a good theory if the fact that the peak stood alone was
    not allowed to disturb you. Nonetheless, it was difficult to be sure; the
    sun reflected off the crystal water and off the approaching land,
    whitewashing detail with its glancing rays. Even after Pike had first
    noticed it, a long hour by the ship’s clock passed before the solitary
    structure rose beneath them. But long before then it was clear they had
    found Daryephna.
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike was pleased with himself; after all, he had only lost the rest of the
    crew, and only one was definitely dead. The others might yet turn up, and
    this was the most likely spot to find them. So there was no point in
    worrying yet. Even the episode at Konndjlan had proved useful. Had it not
    provided the map that led them almost directly to Daryephna? Directly
    enough so that finding it had been the equivalent of only a few days’
    work. Most importantly, the escape from the fortress would add immeasurably
    to the story he would tell when he returned to Two-Bit. Yes, on the whole,
    the mission was progressing most satisfactorily.
  </p>

  <p>
    Daryephna stood alone on a plain of green that was uninterrupted but for a
    few low hills and rivers. Pike guided <em>Number Two</em> over the city, if
    that was the correct word for the solid structure that swept up below
    them. Whoever had built it had appreciated the highly symmetrical. The
    perimeter of Daryephna traced out a diamond with concave sides, each
    several kilometers long. From the corners of the diamond the four major
    arms of the city spiraled inward, intertwining as they rose to the central
    peak. Minor arms were interlaced between the larger arms and also merged
    into one at the center. Pike could not decide whether it was magnificent or
    ugly.
  </p>

  <p>
    Having chosen a landing site between two of the spiral arms, Pike took
    <em>Number Two</em> downward. They descended slowly, carefully.
  </p>

  <p>
    Suddenly Barbalan screamed and clasped her head between her hands. She bent
    to her knees with a contorted face and looked as if she would vomit.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">What’s happening to her?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">It’s the Fear setting in. Take her up, man! Can’t
    you see she’s in agony? Take us up!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Yes, you’re right, absolutely,</q> Pike responded
    quickly but confusedly.
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack knelt by Barbalan. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Are you all right
    now?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The young woman nodded. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">You seemed like
    jelly. Nothing was straight. Everything went dim.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">That’s all right. We’ll fly elsewhere.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike flew kilometer or so out and landed there, this time with one eye on
    the controls and the other on Barbalan. When they were solidly on the
    ground, Pike asked, <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Did you feel anything,
    Paddelack?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Not a thing. Never did last time I was here,
    either. Nothing at all. That’s what I told you.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">I remember your story. I didn’t feel anything,
    either. I must admit it is curious, curious indeed.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack glanced at Barbalan. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">What will we do
    with her? We can’t take her inside.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Then obviously she has to stay here. That’s clear,
    wouldn’t you say?</q> Pike began arming himself.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Won’t need those, you can be sure of that. No one
    is here.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">We’ll see. You can come with me or stay with her.</q>
    Pike jumped out of the shuttle without waiting for an answer and was
    greeted by the hot Bannk wind.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">We’ll be back later,</q> Paddelack explained to
    Barbalan, showing her where food was stored. Then he too hurried to exit.
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike walked along on one of the spiral arms as it gradually wound its way
    inward to the center of the giant rise. There was entrance at the central
    juncture, simply an archway cut into the gray walls. There was nothing to
    be seen on the inside. As far as Pike could tell, everything was completely
    black.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">You’re hesitating,</q> Paddelack called, out of
    breath, from behind him.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">I’m not—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">If one finds himself at a gateway,</q> his
    companion said in a wheedling voice, <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">what should
    one do but go through it?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    With that, Pike sucked in his breath and stepped forward. Inside, it was
    light, bright, clean, an almost fluorescent white with a hint of blue
    bouncing off the tentlike walls. Pike could not discover the source of the
    illumination. When he had been outside, the inside had appeared totally
    dark, pitch-black. Had something switched on when he entered? He hadn’t
    noticed anything. Was it a clever illusion? What illusion? Pike walked
    forward, expecting his footsteps to echo loudly. But there was no sound
    other than that which directly reached his ears. Dead? Anechoic? Pike
    jumped up and landed hard. Now he heard something off a far wall. That was
    better. <q ab:speaker="Pike" ab:filter="reverb">Hello!</q> he shouted,
    cupping his hands to his mouth. Again there was not a great echo, just a
    slight reverberation.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Whom do you expect to find? Your grandfather?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">No, just testing, just trying to get a feel for the
    place.</q> Pike walked over to the wall and ran his hand across the smooth
    surface. <q ab:speaker="Pike">You know, I think we are expected,
    welcome.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack pinched his nose. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">I don’t feel anything
    of the sort. If you want to be Sarek and steal Ostlan’s Vase, that’s fine
    with me, but don’t be surprised when the Bentagen attack.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">I’ll keep that in mind.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">About the only thing I can say for this place is
    that it is at a reasonable room temperature—if I could remember what a
    reasonable temperature was.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack was right; Daryephna did seem to be pleasantly insulated against
    the impossible outside world.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Now that we’re here, what should we look for,
    would you mind telling me?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Anything unusual—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Oh, come on,</q> Paddelack laughed. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">you’ll have to do better than that.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">I’m particularly interested in the metal that Hendig
    showed you. If you have any, let me know immediately.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Why? What’s so important about that?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Just curious, that’s all.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Ten light-years to be curious? I can think of
    other ways of satisfying my curiosity.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Patience, my dear Paddelack, patience.</q>
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    Most rooms contained nothing. In others there were banks of forms that
    might have been taken for controls of some sort, but if they were controls,
    they were certainly not for humans and, in any case, certainly not
    functional. This left Pike and Paddelack wondering if they were controls at
    all. Chairs and sofas were to be found in some of the larger chambers, but
    they were all too big and slightly out of shape. Almost everything in
    Daryephna seemed slightly out of shape; straight lines or simple curves
    didn’t seem popular. The overall impression was one of utter desertion,
    quickly and thoroughly done.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">What do you make of all this?</q> Pike asked as they
    sat in a green park from which a ramp spiraled to heights yet unexplored.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Well,</q> Paddelack replied, <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">since it has webbed feet, it can’t be an eagle.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike squinted at his companion, who was sitting on the turf. <q ab:speaker="Pike">What do you mean by that?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">You look at a curved wall and ask, why is that a
    curved wall and not a straight one? You see a ramp instead of a staircase
    and wonder, why is that a ramp? Why is the metal this color? Why is the
    light source hidden, and why does the light have a peculiar tint? It seems
    to me that whoever built this place was slightly different from us, so they
    built a city that looks slightly different from one we would
    produce. That’s all. Why read any more into it?</q>
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    For the first time since they had left Konndjlan, Barbalan found herself
    alone. The Fear had taken care of that, or, more accurately, the feigning
    of the Fear. She had felt nothing whatsoever when they neared Daryephna,
    but after many of Paddelack’s stories and his assurances that she would be
    attacked, she thought that playacting was the best thing to do.
  </p>

  <p>
    Besides, now she was alone, and that was what she wanted at the moment. Now
    she could concentrate her attention on the necklace that she had kept
    hidden from the others. The chain was heavy metal, the links forged and
    welded. She could barely slide it over her head, but she did, and that
    might prove be a good thing in the future. The pendant. The secret must be
    there. Barbalan fingered the thick disk, engraved on all sides: fire,
    rockets, helmets, spears. The workmanship was detailed, but that did not
    interest Barbalan.
  </p>

  <p>
    Were the symbols a code? The hieroglyphics were standard Gostum symbols
    representing Polkraitz, Fairtalian, Gostum. No, Barbalan decided, the
    symbols were not a code.
  </p>

  <p>
    A telclad or so later, she managed to open the pendant, when she discovered
    that by pressing the sun figure, the disk could then be unscrewed into two
    halves. Inside the bottom half was a needle that pointed almost due west: a
    compass, of course, but Barbalan had never seen one before. Inside the top
    half was a circular card that fell out when she turned that half of the
    pendant over. That annoyed Barbalan; she was getting tired of
    maps. Konndjlan was clearly marked, and fifty kilometers or so away was
    marked the stala. The stala; what did that mean? The root of the word was
    <q>carry.</q> The suffix didn’t make grammatical sense, unless it was
    shorthand for phrase endings. Maybe <q>how to carry?</q> Barbalan looked up
    and the answer was clear. The stala were how the Fairtalian got to the
    other Gostum headquarters. And the map simply showed the way to the stala
    nearest Konndjlan. There were even directions that showed how to use the
    needle to find the way.
  </p>

  <p>
    Barbalan turned the map over to find a list:
  </p>

  <table>
    <tr><td>Stala-Konndjlan</td><td>1,4</td></tr>
    <tr><td>Stala-Sect</td><td>2,9</td></tr>
    <tr><td>Stala-Pant</td><td>3,2</td></tr>
    <tr><td>Stala-Triesk</td><td>4,9</td></tr>
    <tr><td>Stala-Forbidden Elsewhere</td><td>4,8</td></tr>
    <tr><td>Stala-Forbidden Elsewhere</td><td>5,3</td></tr>
    <tr><td>……………</td><td>…</td></tr>
  </table>

  <p>
    There were less than two dozen entries. Barbalan recognized the names of
    several Gostum headquarters. She had even been taken to Pant once,
    blindfolded, since she was not yet Fairtalian. Obviously, the stala had
    been the method. But what did <q>1,4</q> mean? Barbalan had no idea. She
    closed the pendant up tight. She felt half Fairtalian.
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    On the third trip into Daryephna Pike made his first real discovery. He had
    almost given up hope of finding anything remotely intelligible in the city;
    so much of what they had seen made little or no sense. Here it was a
    skeleton of a city. Under the central peak was a park with a dry fountain
    in its center. Blue-green turf, expertly tended, naturally, covered it,
    walkways crossed it, roads circled it. This central atrium dissolved into
    doorways, archways, ramps, and concourses that led to places already
    explored and places unknown. Pike started each search from this central
    park. He walked kilometers upon kilometers, found rooms, many locked, many
    open, none very enlightening. He began to realize that it would take
    months, if not years, to make a thorough search. He was almost ready to
    give up and take his leave, as Hendig must have been about to do twenty
    years earlier. But Hendig <em>had</em> found something. Paddelack had seen
    it; so had Pike. In this skeleton of a city something was to be found.
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike’s mind was fairly blank as he approached the end of a walkway
    overlooking a large lobbylike area. The wall before him had seemed a dead
    end until the corridor opened to one side and the lights beyond offered
    their cool greeting. The chamber was immense, curving away in all
    directions to unresolvable distance. The room was so big Pike thought it
    must be a rocket hangar. He wandered. It was not long before he noticed
    rectangular shapes of various heights far opposite him. It took ten minutes
    to get close; even interior distances were deceiving on Freeze-Bake. By
    then he could see that the rectangles were stacks of large plates, flat,
    frosty gray. He walked over to the closest, which stood waist-high, and
    tried to lift the top plate. It came up easily in his hand.
  </p>

  <p>
    It was metallic hydrogen. The color was right, a little whiter than
    magnesium and, of course, the lightest metal he had ever handled. Pike
    dropped the sheet and a <em>whoosh</em> of air shot out as it landed on the
    stack with a thud. Then he went to Paddelack to gloat.
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack admitted his defeat. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">All right, I’m
    impressed; you found the stuff here just waiting for you, your quest is
    ended. Now would you mind telling me what you were trying to find?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">I’m sorry I didn’t mention it earlier, but I didn’t
    want to turn out a fool. Do you know what this material is?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Well, I remember that Hendig showed me his
    piece. It was very light, but that’s all I know.</q> Paddelack picked up a
    sheet, just as Pike had before, and dropped it. <em>Whoosh.</em> <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Yeah, this is the same stuff.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Metallic hydrogen.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack whistled.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">You know something about it?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack was annoyed. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">I was an engineer,
    remember, even if a bad one. Give me credit for once having known
    something.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Then tell me, if you have metallic hydrogen, what
    would you do with it?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack’s eyes lit up and he hopped on top of the stack. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">What would I do with it? Why, I’d transform the
    world! Do you realize what this is? A room-temperature
    superconductor. Lossless transmission lines and electrical wiring. Do you
    realize just how much electrical power is lost in the wiring? An incredible
    fraction. This stuff would end all that, save billions of quintens. You
    could get rid of that lousy liquid helium, too, you wouldn’t need it. Train
    tracks? Levitate your trains. We do that already, but with that sloppy
    liquid helium. Giant accelerators to ring the world, if you want them. And
    if it’s strong enough, what a building material! Lighter than anything
    else! And, by Sarek, if it’s cheap enough to make, it’s
    inexhaustible. Hydrogen only makes up half the Universe. Sarek, I’m sorry I
    doubted you. This is a find! We’ll be rich. What a thought! Maybe my twenty
    years here will have amounted to something!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike nodded. <q ab:speaker="Pike">I thought it was worth the trip. But,</q>
    he said, looking around, <q ab:speaker="Pike">is there more? As amazing as
    the substance is, it isn’t enough to change a civilization, is it?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack swiveled around from atop his perch and surveyed the
    storeroom. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Not even enough to make us rich.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">I’d rather change a civilization, wouldn’t you?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Hah. All I care about is getting off this planet
    with enough to keep me comfortable for my trouble.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike grinned. <q ab:speaker="Pike">You are a rather sleazy character. You’d
    team up with anyone to be high and dry, wouldn’t you? Liddlefurans, me,
    Gostum, anybody. I’d say you’d betray your own brother to get yourself off
    this improbable world—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Why you—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">One would never guess that you were so desperate from
    your cocky manner of speech. A good hiding place, words, don’t you
    agree?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Suddenly Paddelack’s eyes lost their new-found glimmer and he spat on the
    floor. He knelt down on top of the stack until he was staring straight into
    Pike’s eyes. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Look, man, you have no idea of what
    it is like to live on Patra-Bannk for more than twenty years. To wake up
    day after day and not be sure the sun has moved a centimeter. To wish time
    would fly and carry your life nearer to its end, but only to have the sun
    sit there and laugh, dragging you along minute by agonizing minute. Do you
    know what it is to pound your fist on a door for months on end just to be
    allowed to breathe real air, and at the same time to know that if that door
    opened, you’d be frozen solid in a second? Worst of all, to realize that
    all hope is gone, all hope that you’ll <em>ever</em> get off. Just because
    of one fool minute when this damned planet decided to play a trick on you
    and you weren’t looking. It gnaws at your stomach for every painful minute
    of every infinitely long day and of every infinitely long night. Man, I
    would sell my soul to get off this planet, make no mistake about that.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">And the added treasure here makes for slight
    recompense, eh, Paddy?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
     <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Have you never lost all hope?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
     <q ab:speaker="Pike">Never.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Well, then you’ll never understand what it means
    to be given a second chance.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">I make my second chances. And that includes finding
    the manufacturing facility. A good idea, don’t you agree?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack nodded. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">A good idea. Let’s hope we know
    it when we see it.</q>
  </p>

  <nav><a href="twir_8.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown-bottom" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown-bottom&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_10.xhtml">Next »</a></nav></body></html>