<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:ab="http://example.org/audiobook-schema" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>The World is Round, Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="twir.css" />
  <link rel="icon" href="icon.svg" />
</head>
<body><nav><a href="twir_32.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown-top" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown-top&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_34.xhtml">Next »</a></nav><h2><div>Chapter Thirty-Two</div>Reculer Pour Mieux
  Sauter</h2>

  <p>
    The Bannk was wearing thin. Karrxlyn drilled lines of recruits on the
    plateau at Massarat. Material, often imported from the north, was being
    fashioned into bows and catapults. Karrxlyn watched the Fringemen become
    more and more proficient with their weapons. Targets were more frequently
    pierced through their bull’s-eyes; fewer bolts were lost over the edge or
    shattered on the rocks. Long bows were not the favored weapons; the wind,
    now on the uptake again, played havoc with their flight. Instead,
    crossbows, which could wreak destruction as well as any gun in the hands of
    a good marksman, were substituted. Barbed tips were fashioned from odd
    pieces of metal lying about the caves themselves and in the old
    mines. Shields were difficult. Bamboo-tree wood was in short supply at
    Massarat, and material had to be imported from the more temperate north via
    the stala or constructed from the few plants found along the coast.
  </p>

  <p>
    The coast at Liddlefur had, a teclad ago, been visited for the first time
    this Bannk. The expedition came back hot, almost dead, but with a good
    catch of fish. However, the loss of life, nearly half the party, had been
    enough to convince Pike that the Killer Bannk was impossible below the
    mountains and that food should, along with almost everything else, be
    imported from the north.
  </p>

  <p>
    Karrxlyn watched the first catapult hurl its payload over the edge as the
    huge lever jerked to a halt against the crosspiece and the machine
    rebounded in a cloud of dust. After the first dozen or two engines had been
    completed, Karrxlyn was becoming satisfied, or restless, and went to find
    the Commander.
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike was in council with Effrulyn on his right, holding the Angles, and
    Fara-Ny on his left. Karrxlyn bowed slightly as he entered the chamber,
    scowled at the newfangled clock, which he could not understand, and sat
    down with the others.
  </p>

  <p>
    A diagram of Triesk, which had been delivered by one of the reconnaissance
    missions, was spread across the table. Pike was pacing the room, slowly,
    evenly, without agitation.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">Am I interrupting?</q> Karrxlyn asked.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">No. You have leave to say what you have to say.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">The Bannk is more than half done. Long ago it
    turned the corner in the sky. The recruits are ready, and it is my
    suggestion that we attack as soon as possible. Remember, we must now
    prepare not only for the invasion but for the coming Patra as well. And
    that Patra—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Tjenen exile">—is only a semi-infinite time away,</q>
    Effrulyn finished. <q ab:speaker="Tjenen exile">Applied, details,
    quibblers. Arrgh. Why do I get involved with things of such nature? What
    can be done about it?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike smiled and waved the mathematician silent. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Yes, I
    have been considering our position. My former and now vanished companion
    brought the news that Triesk contains more than twenty thousand
    inhabitants. This is troublesome. It exceeded your estimations. How many
    are we now?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">Five thousand, with more coming all the time,
    Commander.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">That is not enough. Look at these sketches. Triesk
    sits on top of a tall, steep hill. It has the advantage for defense. It
    also has four times the people we have—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">—including children and the aged.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Nonetheless, we are still outnumbered by perhaps two
    to one. And, as you rightly inform me, the Bannk is retreating. There is
    still much light left, but will we have enough to start? That is what I
    have been considering.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">Do you come to any conclusions?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">I suggest that we need something else?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">Such as, Commander?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Surprise.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Karrxlyn laughed, Effrulyn fondled his Angles absently, and Fara-Ny’s staff
    dropped to the floor with a wooden clatter.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">Surprise in the middle of the Bannk, when it takes
    beclads to assemble the forces via the stala and your ships? That sounds
    unlikely, Commander.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Then why not attack at dawn?</q> Pike asked.
  </p>

  <p>
    Normally, Karrxlyn would have bellowed at the idiocy of such a
    suggestion. However, even the regal Karrxlyn had to admit that Pike’s
    stance, sword hanging from his side and head defiant, already anticipating
    such a response, and Karrxlyn’s bellow was stillborn. <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">I assume you have a plan in mind, Commander.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Yes, I have a plan.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">But attacking at dawn assumes we are there during
    the Patra.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Exactly.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">Light? Heat? Food? Shelter? Where are they going
    to come from?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">My shuttles will provide the shelter while the camp is
    built—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">One cannot build during the Patra.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">I think that men can do many things when pressed. We
    will work in short shifts, use heated quazzats if necessary. We will have
    to start getting the necessary materials immediately.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">There is still the problem of light.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">My shuttles have search beams. We will make fires. On
    my planet we have spots that get very cold, too. Men can work there. It can
    be done.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">Does it get as cold as the Patra?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">We will see, won’t we? You asked for my Command. Now I
    have given it to you. Do you object? If not, I suggest we prepare for the
    coming darkness.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Fara-Ny nodded silently. Effrulyn looked about. <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">I
    can’t see what difference it can possibly make; you seem to have nothing
    better to do for amusement.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Karrxlyn shook a fist at the blond-haired boy. <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">Put
    a sword in this one’s hand and I’ll show him what I’d like to do.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Enough,</q> Pike interposed. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Go
    tell the recruits of the delay. They will be housed here during the
    Patra—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Karrxlyn opened his mouth.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">We will make the room,</q> Pike continued, <q ab:speaker="Pike">and this ends the discussion, by my Command.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Karrxlyn rose brusquely, helped Fara-Ny to his feet, and together they left
    the council chamber. Effrulyn stood up but Pike silently, wearily, waved
    him down.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">Yes, Commander?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Sit, just sit with me.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The young man sat down, puzzled, not realizing that Pike hardly noticed
    anything now but the slow ticking of the giant clock. To Effrulyn, the
    clock was as always, monotonous and annoying. To Pike, the arm of the
    pendulum was fluid, stretching and arching as the long swing began trudging
    from the right, creeping faster and faster toward the middle of the endless
    trek.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Hurry! Hurry!</q> he called. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Go
    faster! Do you hear me?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    But the pendulum merely slowed down again as it struggled back up to its
    second maximum, fated only to fall backward into the depths once more.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Faster! Do you think my life can wait for you?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The only response was another clack as the mechanism of the clock advanced
    one increment.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Answer me!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <em>Clack clack clack.</em> And again: <em>Clack clack clack.</em>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Stop!</q> he screamed. But had the scream been heard?
    Had the mathematician flinched?
  </p>

  <p>
    Effrulyn had heard nothing at all. He was aware only of the Commander’s
    turning toward him with hands pressed tightly against his ears and with his
    agonized face drawn into deep convolutions that hid old scars in
    shadow. For a moment, then, he saw Pike’s eyes grow clear and lucid.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Yes, Effrulyn,</q> Pike said so softly that the young
    man strained to hear, <q ab:speaker="Pike" class="no-close-quote">nothing
    better to do…Tell me, Mathematician, you to whom people are, at most,
    annoying inconveniences…you whose life is spent scribbled on pieces of
    paper, whose life will be summed up in a handful of pages incomprehensible
    to the rest of mankind…tell me, you whose life is washed clean of details,
    whose existence shall be of no interest to anyone, but whose thoughts will,
    in the end, be responsible for everything the rest of us take for
    granted…tell me, what of the rest of us?  The politicians, the great
    conquerors, the daring entrepreneurs and marauders whose epitaphs we assume
    will be written across the galaxy by our own hands? Tell me, Mathematician,
    is it truly because we have nothing better to do, because we can do no
    better?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">No! Don’t answer!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The young man remained sitting quietly. He had not heard this cry.
  </p>

  <p>
    <em>Clack clack clack.</em> But the clock had heard and offered its
    unhesitating reply.
  </p>

  <p>
    Effrulyn saw the eyes lose their color then and the older man, older now by
    belbannks, lift himself to his feet, staggering under the weight of his new
    age the constant <em>clack clack clack</em> of the pendulum clock.
  </p>

  <p>
    Effrulyn never forgot the look Pike offered him in the next moment with
    those now fogged, unseeing eyes. It was a moment stripped to the bone; the
    figure standing in front of him was a bare skeleton picked raw. The young
    man had never seen anything so helpless or terrified. The terror was not
    directed at any outer menace but at some inner, hidden demon that he,
    Effrulyn, was not permitted to see. During that moment the Commander opened
    his mouth to speak. But the words were never articulated; their silence
    struck the stone floor with his retreating footfalls, leaving only the
    <em>clack clack clack</em> of the great clock to keep Effrulyn in company.
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    Taljen could always expect to see Alhane doing something when she visited,
    as she often did, but this time she did not like what met her eyes.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Ah!</q> Alhane cried as he swept his apparatus off
    the table. It crashed to the floor, pieces of broken glass caught up in the
    tangle of wires.
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen stepped fully into the room. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Alhane! What’s
    wrong?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane sighed and looked skyward. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Who knows what’s
    wrong?</q> Then he bent to pick up the coil of wire that he had knocked
    away. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Look at this,</q> he said gruffly as he
    reconnected it.
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen walked up to the workbench and passed her fingers over the coil,
    glowing dull red. It was warm—warmer than the hot, surrounding air. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">And how did you do this, my favorite Time Keeper?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I just connected one of my windmill dynamos to this
    wire. But, you see, the heat is feeble and will not be of any real
    value.</q> Alhane switched off the current and wiped the profuse sweat from
    his brow. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">We had better concentrate on
    insulation. Use graskwool, of course. I’ve also found that the burned-out
    charcoal is an excellent insulator. We should grind it up and line the
    outer walls with it. But as for providing a new fuel, I am at a loss. It
    will be a cold Short Patra, this one coming. And I am afraid it will be our
    last.</q> The silver-haired man sat down at the bench and put his head in
    his hands.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Time Keeper,</q> Taljen said, coming up behind him
    and massaging his neck, <q ab:speaker="Taljen">you need a rest.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">It’s only this hot wind. It stifles my
    imagination.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">It isn’t the wind, truly. You’ve been working not
    only on the fuel problem but on the astronomy as well—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">That! It ties my mind up in knots. First I try this
    and that, then I pretend I am standing on the Runaway and looking at
    Patra-Bannk, then the other way around, then from the sun as well—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Why don’t you take a rest?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">And the orbits aren’t circles. Not the Runaway’s, at
    least. Patra-Bannk’s, maybe. Not the Runaway’s. I am wracking my brain. The
    observations make no sense. And what Stringer said about the stars moving
    constantly…naturally I assumed the same for the planets. But is that the
    case? Nothing is coming out right.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Alhane, you must take a break from this work.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">It may as well be Mid-Patra, for all I am able to
    see. My soul is in the dark. It is a long night, I can feel that.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Time Keeper!</q> Taljen shouted, shaking Alhane by
    the shoulders. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I have never seen anyone so depressed
    in my life. Is that like a Tjenen?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I don’t know, is it? Am I depressed?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">You most certainly are. I’ve never seen anything
    like it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I’m lost; the work is at a dead end. There is no
    place to go.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">You have to take a rest,</q> Taljen repeated, more
    softly this time. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">The Bannk is waning and the
    teclads are rapidly shortening. Some have begun dancing below, where it is
    cooler. You can join them. It might clear your mind, don’t you think?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">You know I don’t dance.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I don’t see why you shouldn’t. You’re more clever
    than the rest of us put together. I think you should be able to figure out
    how to dance.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane shook his head. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">That’s not it, Taljen. You
    know dancing doesn’t interest me. It takes too much time away from what
    needs to be done—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">But you aren’t getting anything done.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">You like to dance; I like to work. Or, at least, I
    need to work.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen sighed and her shoulders drooped. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I am
    beginning to see this Bannk, Time Keeper, that your life isn’t as I had
    always viewed it. I used to see you as always happy and having fun with
    what you did. But now I wonder, Alhane, where is the fun in your life?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Ah, my Carefree Taljen, you are the best dancer in
    all of Ta-tjenen, I’d not be surprised. Sometimes I envy you.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">You envy me, Alhane?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">In my work, I am riding a grask that I cannot
    stop. The work sweeps me along. I love it as much of the time as I can, but
    there is so little choice in the matter. You, I envy you your choice. You
    could go south with Stringer. I never could; my work forbids it. I look
    around at the rest of Ta-tjenen and sometimes wonder how I was so unlucky
    to get stuck with being Time Keeper. If I had my life to live over, I would
    do something useful, perhaps become a grask tender.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">But, Alhane, who else could be Time Keeper? You have
    so much more intelligence than the rest of us.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane laughed his squeaky laugh. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">We aren’t talking
    about intelligence, though I’ll certainly not deny there is such a thing,
    and present in some more than in others. I may not have any more natural
    intelligence than you or any number of Tjenens, that I don’t know.</q> He
    cocked his head for a moment. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I think, in my own
    defense, I might—no pun intended—have a different time sense than you. To
    an average Tjenen, the Bannks are short and fly quickly. So it is with me
    also. But when I am hard at work, the time seems to expand and the clads
    double or triple in length, allowing me to get more done. I will work on
    pages of observations and look up and the clock will have hardly moved a
    notch. There is that.…And there were my parents. You never met them, did
    you?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">No, that was before I was old enough to
    remember.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Oh, how I hated them both. They were always telling
    me what an idiot I was and at the same time pushing me to do this and
    that. In one breath I was brilliant and in the next I was worthless. I ask
    you, where is the reason in that? Well, I’ve long since given up wasting my
    time hating them for it, but I’ve always wished I were a member of a
    nestrexa instead.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">You’ve never told me that before, Alhane. I always
    got along very well with all of my parents, maybe because they would only
    have to put up with me for a Parlztlu.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I wish I could claim that, but, alas, I can’t. I
    wouldn’t go through a family again even for gravity.…And there’s always the
    libido, for lack of a better word. Nervous energy. It can’t all be
    dissipated on my wife. And now that she’s gone, I’m even more restless and
    need to occupy myself.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">You could get another for the next Parlztlu.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane smiled and frowned at the same time. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I am
    afraid that a Time Keeper can never enter into the Parlztluzan. Not that I
    would know who to pick at this point. You’re too young, my Taljen. Besides,
    I ask you, would you want to go through it? I drove my wife crazy with my
    habits. Do you think it is worth it to be the wife of a Time Keeper?
    Although I can’t say, never having been a husband to a Time Keeper, I would
    doubt it. But I might tell you, since you brought up the matter, that you
    should consider getting someone else. You will have to next Bannk,
    anyway.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen turned away. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Oh, Alhane…you’re the only one
    who talks to me any more. I might as well be an Alien myself.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Are you sure no one will talk to you? Many have
    asked me about you. They come to me all the time and wonder what you are
    doing. They say, <q>We’ve just come from Taljen’s house and she says she
    isn’t feeling well,</q> or they say, <q>Taljen says her shift is just
    beginning and she doesn’t have time.</q> Admittedly, people don’t talk much
    in the Bannk; there is too much to be done for the Patra. But is it they
    who aren’t talking? I wonder, Taljen, if I am the only one who is
    depressed.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen sat down cross-legged on the cluttered floor; her hair prevented
    Alhane from seeing her lowered face. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I don’t
    know. Everything is so different now that I’m back, so mixed up. How can I
    talk to them? I have nothing to say. How can I pick a nesta after having
    spent so long with one person only—an Alien, for that matter? No one trusts
    me after having been with him. It isn’t the same now. I don’t know how else
    to put it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">You have never spoken to me about what happened on
    the journey.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">If I could tell you what happened on that journey,
    then I would know myself. But I don’t.</q> Her words ended with an abrupt
    change in intonation.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">You are bitter. Was Stringer so terrible to you?
    Have I misjudged him so completely?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen suddenly jumped to her feet and ran from the room. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">He lied to me all the time. I hate him!</q>
  </p>

  <nav><a href="twir_32.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown-bottom" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown-bottom&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_34.xhtml">Next »</a></nav></body></html>