<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:ab="http://example.org/audiobook-schema" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>The World is Round, Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="twir.css" />
  <link rel="icon" href="icon.svg" />
</head>
<body><nav><a href="twir_28.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_30.xhtml">Next »</a></nav><h2><div>Chapter Twenty-Eight</div>A Second
  Gathering of Friends</h2>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">’Tseems that the Polkraitz were an amazing
    bunch,</q> Valyavar said as he ran his hands over the wall of the room in
    which he and Stringer found themselves. He sat down on one of the many
    couches and stretched out his giant’s legs, scratched his already growing
    beard, and relaxed. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">To assume, this was the way I
    was taken from Triesk to Pant.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Absolutely,</q> Stringer agreed, <q ab:speaker="Stringer">but I’m sure the Polkraitz had nothing to do with
    this.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">You know for sure?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I saw some Polkraitz writing once, on a ship at
    Ta-tjenen. It’s much like the writing the Tjenens use themselves, which
    makes sense since everyone seems to be descended from the same original
    group. You notice everyone speaks the same language, even though over the
    years different dialects have grown up, and everyone is biologically
    identical. Anyway, the writing on the stala was very different; I had time
    to notice that as we entered. And while I’m not yet certain why the
    Polkraitz were here, clearly all the Tjenen stories and the ones we heard
    on the way south are consistent in one thing: that the Polkraitz came and
    departed something over a thousand years ago. Just as clearly, this planet
    was built earlier than that.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">What?</q> Valyavar screamed.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You didn’t know, then? It’s been coming to me in
    nightmares and by bits and pieces ever since I got here, almost as if
    somebody were trying to tell me. But in any case, I’m convinced this planet
    is artificial. It is the only conclusion that fits all the
    observations.</q> He went on to explain to Valyavar all his experiences,
    nebulous as they were, that had convinced him the planet was not
    natural. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">And so,</q> he concluded, <q ab:speaker="Stringer">just by the very fact that this planet is here, with
    mountains, water, life, all of which must be well over one thousand years
    old, the Polkraitz couldn’t have had anything to do with it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Sounds good,</q> Valyavar said. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">The gravity bothered me, too, but I couldn’t make it
    stick. I just didn’t know enough to decide. It is hard for someone like me
    to think in terms of artificial planets, that’s a certainty.</q> Suddenly
    he turned pale. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">A big mistake.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What’s that?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Seems that this transport is top-secret, to be
    used only by those Fairtalian unless passengers are escorted and
    blindfolded by the same. How is it going to look when we show up, clearly
    not Fairtalian—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">—and not blindfolded. I see your point. I wonder
    if we can turn this thing around. Do you think these are controls of some
    sort?</q> Stringer stood up and examined the devices that lined the front
    end of the compartment. There seemed to be three widely differing
    constructions, and he didn’t know if they were controls or decorations. He
    began fiddling randomly with any of these that fit his hand.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Hey! Are you sure that’s a good idea?</q> Valyavar
    shouted as he jumped up from his reclining position. But he grew quickly
    silent as the front end of the room became transparent. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">What are we seeing?</q> he whispered.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I’m not sure.</q> But in a way, Stringer knew. The
    tube that stretched ahead of them to infinity, fading away as it got
    smaller and smaller, was surely a tunnel. Three bulges in the tube, spaced
    equally at one hundred twenty degrees, ran along the tunnel wall until they
    converged at the vanishing point. What was most frightening were the
    luminescent circles that ran around the inner circumference of the
    tube. They formed a reference grid. And they were moving. Stringer picked
    out a small ring near infinity, almost unresolvable, and watched it grow
    until it was moving so fast over his head that it was invisible.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">We’re traveling,</q> Valyavar said flatly.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer snorted. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">There is some truth to that,</q>
    he said, lying down.
  </p>

  <p>
    After perhaps two telclads of sleep, although Stringer could only guess at
    this, Valyavar tapped him on the shoulder. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">We’ve
    been speeding up.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer rose to his feet and went to the window. The circles were no
    longer individually visible, just blurs now, providing the whole tunnel
    with a dim glow that alternated in intensity as they swept by. Stringer
    squeezed his eyes shut in disbelief and began pacing the room, peering into
    the cabinets, anything just to avoid looking ahead. He found spacesuits in
    one of the storage closets. Just for fun, he tried one on to see if it
    would fit, and it seemed alive, adjusting to his body as if it were made
    for him.
  </p>

  <p>
    Perhaps another two telclads had passed—who could tell?—when Valyavar made
    his second announcement. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">We’re slowing again.</q>
    Indeed, the circles were once more becoming visible.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Funny, I don’t feel as if we’re slowing. I don’t
    feel as if we’re moving at all.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Soon the rings spaced themselves at wider and wider intervals, until they
    barely crawled past. Eventually the last ring, glowing dimly, went by, and
    no more were to be seen. The passengers felt a slight bump, an upward
    acceleration, and that was all. Within a few moments the cabin door opened
    and Valyavar, with one hand on his kalan and the other on one of Stringer’s
    grasers, walked out. Stringer followed, cat-like and circumspect.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">This way,</q> Valyavar said, pointing to what
    seemed to be the exit. As they emerged outside they were met by a blast of
    superheated air.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Sarek! Verlaxchi! What a furnace!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer almost ran back into the stala but knew there would be little
    point in that. He looked around and saw orange sand and mountains that rose
    like a wall not two centimeters from his eyes and cut off half the
    sky. Stringer was becoming frantic; the air was searing in his throat and
    tearing at his lungs, and he thought that his clothes would catch fire. He
    was sure he would die within moments. His ears perked up: the sound to his
    left could only be that of trickling water. He ran around and suddenly he
    was in the shade, water dripping on his head from a troughlike awning above
    him.
  </p>

  <p>
    Valyavar was not far behind, clutching at his own throat. Cupping his hand
    to catch some of the leaking water, he drank and spat. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">It’s almost as hot as this air! Sarek!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">But it’s saving our lives. Look.</q> Stringer
    pointed to a wide awning with green foliage dangling from its top. Mounted
    on bamboolike posts, it ran across the desert to vanish at the base of the
    nearby mountains.
  </p>

  <p>
    Valyavar stared for a moment and then looked in the other direction. Not
    ten meters behind him, the trough angled toward the ground, spilling its
    contents into a large lake. The water did have to go somewhere. At the lake
    were grask, drinking, and by the grask were Gostum. They were not wearing
    black, but white. Nonetheless, the orange stripe made their identity
    unmistakable. Valyavar raised his pistol as he tugged on Stringer’s arm.
  </p>

  <p>
    The nearest Gostum saw them and signaled to the others. There were at least
    a dozen, hiding in the shade of the stala. Stringer was already poised for
    fighting.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Little Stringer, ’tis not to be foolish. They
    haven’t killed us yet, so let it be.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer lowered his kalan as they were surrounded.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Fairtalian guard 2">You are the Aliens,</q> one of the
    Gostum said, scratching his rough face with his sixth finger. <q ab:speaker="Fairtalian guard 2">We have been expecting you. We will take
    you to the Commander.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Valyavar shook his head in puzzlement. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Soon I may
    be placing faith in God.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Let’s hope you’re not dressing warmly, at
    least.</q> Stringer grinned as he mounted the grask that had been brought
    for him. He expected the trip to take a telclad, no more, the mountains
    seemed so close. But the fifty-kilometer ride stretched on and on in agony,
    with the shade above and the cooling water doing little to alleviate the
    pain.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Fairtalian guard 2">This is a new project the Commander
    initiated,</q> the Fairtalian explained with pride. <q ab:speaker="Fairtalian guard 2">It was only completed at Mid-Bannk. We had
    to divert a river, import material from the north, and build it with the
    labor of thousands of our recruits. The Commander is wise. The channel
    makes the stala so much more accessible now that it is being used
    constantly. The new recruits are being housed at Massarat.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer hardly paid attention. Massarat meant nothing to him; the heat on
    the desert under the sun did. Finally, no matter how much he stretched his
    head, he could see nothing but the mountains. The crew-cut grask began to
    climb, and the temperature—thank Lashgar—dropped a little. Why the Gostum
    lived in the mountains became remarkably clear.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer only vaguely remembered seeing a large stone slab rise in front of
    him, signaling their arrival. He had been slumped over the neck of the
    grask at the time. He remembered even less of the drawbridge and passed out
    totally within clads after that.
  </p>

  <p>
    When he awoke, he had no idea how long he had been asleep. Valyavar was
    still snoring next to him on some large cushions. Soon a guard entered the
    room.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Gostum guard 4">The Commander will see you any time you
    wish—if you are rested.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer found himself eager to see Pike again; what this Commander
    business was about, he didn’t know. In fact, he was so eager that he rolled
    over to Valyavar and shook the sleeping giant to awaken him. Eventually
    Valyavar complied, and soon after they were trotting into the council
    chamber. Even before he saw Pike, Stringer heard the clack, clack of a
    giant clock and was surprised to see two men standing on either side of it.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Friends!</q> came the joyous shout as Pike rose from a
    huge table to greet them. <q ab:speaker="Pike">We’ve been expecting
    you.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">So we’ve been told,</q> Stringer remarked as he
    took Pike’s arm.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Valyavar <em>and</em> Stringer! I had been told one
    was alive, but two is truly amazing. One chance in a million!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">’Tis true, we’ve had more than some luck. Seeing
    you is a good thing.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">You look as if you’ve been through a few things
    yourself,</q> observed Pike, standing back.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">And you. Commander? Look at yourself. Gold,
    bracelets, necklaces. You look positively decadent.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike frowned deeply but quickly recovered his smile. <q ab:speaker="Pike">It helps get things done around here. The Gostum have
    certain traditions to which it is wise to adhere. Sit down with me. Let’s
    have some drink.</q> Pike waved his arms.
  </p>

  <p>
    They sat down at a long table covered with an elaborately woven
    cloth. Stringer saw many figures on it, many weapons, and other things less
    distinguishable. Absently he picked at the edges, and pieces fell off in
    his hands.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">You seem to be highly regarded,</q> Valyavar
    said. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">The observation’s clear enough.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">We’re Polkraitz, aren’t we?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer frowned. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Are you serious?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike didn’t answer.
  </p>

  <p>
    Just then three men walked in: a tall, husky man, about the same build as
    Valyavar, a young man with blond hair, and another who, in this
    surrounding, was clearly Alien.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Ah,</q> Pike said. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Meet
    Paddelack, my right-hand man. I never would have survived without him, nor
    he without me, I suspect. He came here with Hendig more than twenty years
    ago and has managed to stay alive ever since.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">’Tis something to doubt. A feat to be wondered at,
    yuh?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">There was no alternative. Stranded,</q> Paddelack
    said. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">So tell me, where’ve you been?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer was still feeling tired and now a little cranky, but he
    answered. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Ta-tjenen. I think it’s called Triesk
    down here.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    A rumble emerged from the standing giant, an eyebrow was raised at the
    blond-haired boy, and Pike’s face lit up. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Tell me,
    Stringer, did you see rockets at Triesk?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Yes, I saw two.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike slammed his fist down on the table and glared at Paddelack. <q ab:speaker="Pike">You see, Paddelack, the Gostum have always been right,
    and you have always been a fool not to believe me. The Polkraitz again
    demonstrate their greatness, and the mission is even more clear.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer cocked his head. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Why is everyone so taken
    by the Polkraitz?</q> he asked, yawning.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">You have not seen the great city, but you have seen
    the stala. A great work, is it not? Now you add the rockets we have always
    suspected.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Nonsense,</q> Stringer objected, shaking his
    head. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Who were they?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Originators of all of which I have just spoken—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">The Polkraitz were nothing of the kind.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">How can you say that?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">From the evidence at Triesk.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Ah, yes, the Trieskans. Merely prisoners of the
    Polkraitz.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Perhaps. Or maybe they were prisoners of the
    Gostum, and the Polkraitz were gone long before then and had nothing to do
    with it all. Or maybe you’re right. If I were holding them prisoners and
    didn’t want them to escape, I’d surely tell them the world was flat with an
    edge to fall off and that Ta-tjenen was the only place there was. On the
    other hand, the Tjenens seem to feel they were the victors of the Great
    Revolt. Tell me, who were the Polkraitz?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">They built Daryephna, the city we came to find. I saw
    it with my own eyes, a wondrous city—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I doubt it. The Polkraitz were here and gone over
    a thousand years ago. Maybe they came to investigate the planet, as we did,
    and found the stalas at Triesk and Konndjlan. Maybe something happened and
    they had to leave suddenly, abandoning some behind. Maybe there was a
    revolt. Maybe all that revolt stuff is two-thousand-odd years of
    embellishment. But one thing I’m sure of is that the Polkraitz, whoever
    they were, left for good. Who would come back to this hell? They’d have to
    be fools.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike shook his head violently. <q ab:speaker="Pike">A great race! They
    built wonders! You have seen them yourself!</q> He was screaming.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Look,</q> Stringer said as calmly as he could
    manage. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">How many people live on Patra-Bannk?
    Triesk has something like twenty thousand. I doubt there are three times
    that many in all other places combined—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Twenty thousand! We underestimated! How could the
    mistake have been made?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack urged Stringer to continue.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">So the Polkraitz disappeared twelve belbannks ago,
    leaving behind the origins of the present population. How many people could
    there have been then to produce the population we see now? Use your
    head. What could it have been? Several hundred? A few thousand? Maybe the
    famous Lashgar had fifty followers, who knows?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">It can’t be, it mustn’t be!</q> cried Pike.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Why not? How many fought in the battle of the
    Transhi pass? A hundred?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">But the city—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I don’t yet understand that city,</q> Stringer
    replied in a lowered voice, <q ab:speaker="Stringer">or why it is the only
    one to be found, or why anything else, but I am sure that city is ages
    older than anything the Polkraitz built. Maybe they stumbled on it as
    Hendig did, but they didn’t build it, I can tell you that. I want you to
    take me to Daryephna.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">That is impossible. I have been there and explored
    it. Triesk has more to offer.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack had stood up and was facing the entrance way. Silence gradually
    fell about the table as Paddelack ran from the argument.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Barbalan!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike stood up. <q ab:speaker="Pike">It is good to see you, Barbalan. I had
    been informed by the guards from Pant that you went there searching for
    Valyavar. Thus I gave orders to leave you unhindered. Good work.</q> He
    smiled benevolently.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer and Valyavar exchanged glances of understanding.
  </p>

  <p>
    At that another guard walked in. Stringer wondered where he had seen him
    before, and recently.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Fairtalian guard 1">You asked to see me, Commander?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike responded angrily. <q ab:speaker="Pike">I ordered the Trieskan woman
    to be brought here not a half-beclad ago. Where is she?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The guard pointed to Barbalan. <q ab:speaker="Fairtalian guard 1">She took
    her.</q> He swiveled toward the conference table. <q ab:speaker="Fairtalian     guard 1">And these two were with her.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike began to shake uncontrollably. He grasped the bracelet on his left
    wrist and turned it back and forth. He could smell the oil from the burning
    torches. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Is this true?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">There must be a mistake,</q> Stringer lied.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Yuh, what’s he talking about?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Fairtalian guard 1">There was no mistake,</q> the guard
    insisted. <q ab:speaker="Fairtalian guard 1">I recognized Barbalan but
    allowed her to go because of your edict. I assumed all was in good
    order. There are others who will confirm what I say.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike slammed his fist on the table and a cloud of dust rose. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Where is she, Barbalan?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    For the first time since Paddelack had known her, he thought he saw
    Barbalan frightened. Why he was so sure, he could not say. Perhaps she
    stepped back a centimeter at Pike’s scream; perhaps her hand quivered
    slightly. Perhaps the first <em ab:speaker="Barbalan">I</em> of her
    response was hesitant. She controlled her fear well, as always, as all
    Gostum did. But she <em>was</em> frightened.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">I don’t know.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike’s eyes grew to twice their normal size and then narrowed to the
    narrowest of slits. Stringer stood motionless as Pike walked slowly over to
    Barbalan, put his hand across her throat, and began to strangle her. She
    made no motion to stop him and no motion to give him the information he
    wanted. Stringer began to understand what it was to be a Gostum, or what it
    was to be Barbalan. She would die first before she ceded anything. And she
    was dying. Her knees began to sink to the floor, and her face,
    chameleonlike, was turning horrible colors.
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack looked about desperately, not knowing what to do. His legs and
    arms were paralyzed.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer could not bear it any longer. He ran forward and grabbed Pike’s
    arm, slamming him backhanded across the face with all his strength. Pike
    reeled, and Stringer was immediately surrounded by other Gostum. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">We took her to Triesk! Let Barbalan go!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike stepped back. Stringer wrenched himself free from his restrainers and
    knelt by Barbalan. Her breathing was faint and irregular. He held her
    close, pressing her head to his chest and glaring at Pike. If his kalan had
    been near, it would now be resting in the Commander’s throat.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">You helped her?</q> Pike asked.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer did not move a millimeter, only ran his fingers through Barbalan’s
    hair and kissed her forehead. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Forgive me,</q> he
    whispered to her. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Yes,</q> he said aloud.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">And you?</q> Pike asked, turning to his left.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">All three.</q> Valyavar nodded.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">If you hadn’t once been my friends, I’d have you
    executed on the spot. As it is, I’ll just have to put you away until I
    decide what to do with you.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Out of the Bannk and into the Patra,</q> Valyavar
    muttered as they were led away.
  </p>

  <nav><a href="twir_28.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_30.xhtml">Next »</a></nav></body></html>