<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:ab="http://example.org/audiobook-schema" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>The World is Round, Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="twir.css" />
  <link rel="icon" href="icon.svg" />
</head>
<body><nav><a href="twir_5.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_7.xhtml">Next »</a></nav><h2><div>Chapter Five</div>Introductions for Planet
  and Explorer II</h2>

  <p>
    Stringer couldn’t remember exactly when he had first realized he was still
    alive. The first thoughts were slow in crossing that nebulous dividing line
    between the unconscious and the aware. They were simple thoughts, direct
    verbalizations of feelings: the ground was hard; there was a great pain in
    his leg. And it was hot. Did he have a fever? After a few seconds Stringer
    had convinced himself that he did not have a fever, but he had convinced
    himself that it was indeed very hot.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer turned toward his right hand. It was resting on a clump of
    moss. No, it was not moss. It felt like moss but looked liked miniature
    ferns, only a few centimeters long and almost completely unfurled.
  </p>

  <p>
    Valyavar was gone. The thought hit him suddenly and he jerked himself
    aright, only to scream aloud as the pain shot up from his leg. Now he saw
    the blood staining his brown pant leg. Broken. He looked again to his right
    and saw a brief message scrawled into the hard dirt: <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Remember, the road to God is a lonely one and perhaps
    never-ending.</q> Stringer managed a slight smile but didn’t like the
    implication of the message with blood trailing off the last
    letters. Clearly Val was dead, the great priest who had somewhere lost his
    face and found it again somewhere else. Val, the one and only. But where
    was the body? Stringer glanced toward <em>Number One</em> on his left. It
    lay at the base of the cliff, cockeyed, skewed over toward him. Had he been
    thrown clear? That didn’t seem likely. The only thing that was clear was
    that he was alone.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer wondered if he was brave enough to kill himself. He couldn’t move,
    and the heat would kill him sooner or later, anyway. There was the sun
    again. It really was not very high in the sky, barely flirting with the
    treetops. As far as he could tell, it looked about where he had left it, so
    he couldn’t have been unconscious very long. But then he remembered the
    sixty-hour trip up the coast, when the sun had deceived them by hanging
    motionless in the sky. Maybe it had moved. Stringer couldn’t make up his
    mind and succeeded in confusing himself.
  </p>

  <p>
    It didn’t matter. The question was whether or not he should kill
    himself. The wind was hot over Stringer’s face; the breeze caused a
    continual rustling of the trees. Were they trees? Tall, yes. The only
    leaves were at the top, wide, fanning outward like palm leaves. But each
    tree had three trunks. The leaves sat upon the middle one, and surrounding
    that central trunk were two others, hollowed like canoes, as if the tree
    had sprung out of a giant pod and the pod had grown up with the tree.
  </p>

  <p>
    But should he kill himself? The conflict was between a vague interest in
    exploring his surroundings and the conviction that Pike would not find him
    before he died, anyway. The sweat rolled freely off Stringer’s forehead and
    he reached for his graser, strapped, as always, across his chest. It would
    be very painless, he thought. Who would care, anyway? Certainly not he.
  </p>

  <p>
    A pair of arms suddenly grasped him around the shoulders. It was not
    Valyavar. The graser in Stringer’s hand streaked upward and fired.
  </p>

  <p>
    Five men and three women, dark in skin like the body lying next to him,
    stood around Stringer; wide-eyed, they began to back away in an enlarging
    circle. Stringer’s left hand lay in a growing pool of blood issuing from
    the still figure beside him. The woman was quite dead. A thud off to the
    right brought his eyes to rest on an opening hand. A makeshift stretcher
    fell to the ground. The stretcher…the stretcher…
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer remembered the fight in Elswer’s and how easy that had been. He
    remembered the shooting gallery and the little balls and how easy that had
    been. He reflected on his speed, which was unequaled by anyone. Then he
    glanced at the body next to him and realized that this time, perhaps for
    the first time, he had acted too quickly. I’m dead now, he thought, but
    it’s what I had planned, anyway. As he thought those words the interest to
    explore his surroundings became suddenly greater, and he realized, too,
    that his wish to kill himself had passed.
  </p>

  <p>
    The strangers were now backed off to the edge of the clearing, talking
    among themselves. Stringer was surprised by only two things: the delay in
    action and their looking so human. He looked at the gun in his hand, sat up
    with a struggle, and flung the pistol several meters in their
    direction. When the others saw Stringer fling the gun, they jumped back
    again. Couldn’t they see he wasn’t going to hurt them?
  </p>

  <p>
    All Stringer could do was sigh as a gray-clad figure ran off through the
    woods. After about half an hour he heard more voices approaching. Not less
    than thirty people gathered around him now. When one of the original group
    came closer, Stringer pointed to his leg. The man seemed to understand and
    went about splinting the bone. A woman approached, also one of the original
    group, circled around, touched him gingerly as if he were red-hot, then
    signaled to the others when she was not burned.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer was lifted onto the stretcher. Off they went through the
    woods. The sunlight filtered easily through the trees and provided a
    continual variation of light and dark on the backs of his porters. Stringer
    looked closely at the suits they were wearing. They were thick and shone
    dully. Leather flasks, two per person and slung from their shoulders,
    bounced on their flanks with each step. The cowl they all wore looked funny
    to Stringer. It covered their heads, coming to a slightly pointed rim over
    their eyes, and, in back, fell over their necks and shoulders in three
    pieces of loose cloth. Stringer wished he had one. It was very hot.
  </p>

  <p>
    The company stopped once, changed carriers, and continued out of the woods
    past some farmland. Now Stringer saw the town beyond. It sat overlooking
    the fields from its citadel, a large flat hill, steep and maybe thirty
    meters high. Beyond the hill the ground leveled off but rose once more in
    less than a kilometer to other hills that were even higher.
  </p>

  <p>
    In a few moments he was being carried up one of the many stairways that led
    to the top of this acropolis and into the town. To the thirty people in his
    retinue more continually added themselves, always pointing and chirping
    like children. Stringer did his best to ignore them and concentrated on the
    town itself. He was surprised to see it dotted with windmills. (Actually,
    Stringer had never seen a windmill before, but that was what he was looking
    at.) He opened his mouth to ask about this but closed it again abruptly
    when he realized that in many ways he was now a prisoner. The vanes of the
    windmills, resembling not pinwheels but vertical eggbeaters, whirled
    continuously in the brisk wind that blew dirt into his eyes. Then Stringer
    noticed that all the roofs of all the buildings were strikingly
    sloped. Some were sloped on all sides, some just on the northern side. But
    all were sloped and all had openings in them that pointed north. The fact
    that everything was also painted bright white did not hit Stringer until a
    few minutes later.
  </p>

  <p>
    Now the party was approaching a large central park that was covered with
    that strange grass or moss. A number of pod-trees were arranged in an
    immense circle that circumscribed the ring shape of the park itself. At the
    center of this ring was a huge circular plaza that must have had a radius
    of at least one hundred and fifty meters. It was almost flat, rising to a
    slight mound in the middle, and was made of something like concrete; across
    it ran four curves of metal inset into the ground. The metal bands
    stretched from one end of the plaza to the other on the northern half,
    following long oval paths that were streaked with etched-in markings. The
    plaza surface itself was cracked with fine lines and the metal was
    tarnished and smooth. Stringer looked up to see a large, tent-like building
    sitting exactly in the center of the circle, higher than anything else in
    the town. It was as if a great, solid tepee had been mounted on huge wooden
    pillars so that one could walk freely beneath. Then Stringer looked down
    and saw the shadow, diffused by the clouds, cutting across the ground,
    stopping at the outermost band. He traced the shadow back to its origin, a
    slender rod on top of the tent. The plaza was a sundial, of course, and the
    rod its gnomon, but Stringer didn’t know what that was. And it was past
    midday.
  </p>

  <p>
    For a brief moment Stringer could see virtually the entire town from this
    vantage point; then he was taken inside the tent and set down on the
    floor. Several fires were burning, sending curls of smoke shooting up
    around a large square map that hung from ropes above his head, and out a
    small hole in the apex. Nearly seventy people were in the tent, and at his
    entrance, the noise level shot up. The thirty who had brought him stood
    around him in a semicircle facing a row of older men and women. Stringer
    felt as if he were between the jaws of a vise.
  </p>

  <p>
    He thought an argument was in progress involving the man and woman who had
    carried him most of the way from the wreck. Stringer did not hear raised
    voices and screams. The volume stayed nearly constant, but pitches
    traversed octaves and speeds modulated quickly. This went on for a long
    while. Finally the woman turned to her male counterpart and shrugged. They
    picked up the stretcher and carried Stringer out of the tent.
  </p>

  <p>
    Not far away—beyond a large archway that stood at the edge of the plaza,
    and beyond the park—they passed an old man sitting with a baby on a
    doorstep and entered a prismatically shaped building. Stringer was
    deposited in a small conical room that adjoined the main structure. Soon
    the woman brought him some food, shoving the bowl into his hands, and
    Stringer ate voraciously. When he asked for more, the woman refused and put
    the bowl away. Then she pointed to herself and said, <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Taljen.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">Benjfold,</q> the man said, pointing at his own
    chest.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Stringer,</q> Stringer said, and the language
    lesson had begun.
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    For about the next month that queer conical room was Stringer’s home. He
    had a large mat for sleeping. There was a basin with a pipe leading to it
    that let in a rush of water when opened and a leaky dribble when stoppered,
    which disturbed Stringer’s unpleasant dreams. Taljen checked frequently to
    make sure no water was lost. Stringer even had a toilet of sorts that
    emptied somewhere beneath the house. Two stools and a fireplace, whose
    dented metal chimney rose through the sloping walls, completed the
    furnishings. The walls themselves were made of the leathery, smelly wood of
    the pod-trees, and the three windows out into the wall looked trapezoidal
    when viewed straight on because of the slant. Finally, a continual hot
    breeze was let in through the hole in the roof and was cooled somewhat by
    the leaves and branches placed in the flow. As the month went by, Stringer
    thankfully noticed that the breeze became noticeably cooler but
    unthankfully stronger.
  </p>

  <p>
    During that same month his leg healed enough so that he could begin
    exercising it again, and he learned the language of Ta-tjenen. Taljen and
    Benjfold would sit and drill him to hours on end, teaching him as they
    would a child and showing no mercy. When they finished a session, he would
    be sent out into the streets with his crutch. The streets of Ta-tjenen were
    usually empty. People walked quickly to escape the sun and never seemed
    interested in talking to each other, but when they saw Stringer, they, too,
    would stop and drill him. He developed violent headaches from
    concentration. <q>You can do it,</q> his dreams told him. <q>You can even
    stand up. Stand up.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The first thing that Stringer asked when he knew enough words was what had
    happened to Valyavar.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">There was a Gostum near you and we ate him,</q>
    Taljen replied.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer missed some of the words but thought he understood enough. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What? You ate him?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">You seemed not to mind when we gave you some of him
    shortly afterward. We eat our own if they die unsick. Do you think we can
    afford to waste food?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Again Stringer missed words but shrugged. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">No,</q>
    he replied, guessing at the question.
  </p>

  <p>
    At the end of the month, or thereabouts, Taljen returned after a long
    absence and, sweating, sat down in front of Stringer, cross-legged as
    usual, chin resting on hands resting on knees, staring straight into his
    eyes. Stringer stared back, but not, he guessed, for the same
    reason. Taljen was beautiful and he enjoyed watching her. Her mahogany hair
    hung in loose curls over her shoulders and breasts and swayed heavily when
    she turned her head or when the wind caught it just right. Her complexion
    was dark, as dark as her hair, and her eyes, set deeply, were
    blue. Stringer had never seen blue eyes before, but even so, they seemed
    out of place on such a face, much as his own apple-green eyes were out of
    place on his own olive skin. The most disconcerting thing on her very human
    body was her six fingers, two of which seemed to be thumbs.
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen shrugged and his stomach growled. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Can I
    have something to eat?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">You’ve eaten eight times with the beclad. No
    more. You’ve had your ration, and the fields aren’t to be strained for the
    likes of you, Alien.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer pressed his stomach inward with his fingers. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Well,</q> he said slowly, <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I
    suppose you want to begin the drill.</q> He sighed, not wanting another
    drill now. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You know,</q> he went on, trying to
    start a conversation with his still-crippled tongue, <q ab:speaker="Stringer">you have a beautiful language. I like it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I wouldn’t know,</q> Taljen replied, <q ab:speaker="Taljen">It is the only one I have ever heard. But why do you
    mention it, Stringer?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer shrugged. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I never liked Bitter very
    much. It’s flat; there is no variation in sound. Your language uses the
    voice. Speed changes and volume and pitch. It is like a song. It’s
    nice. But it is hard, though. My voice isn’t used to making so many
    different sounds.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen shook her head with a regal toss, as she so often did. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Well, Stringer Murderer, I am not sure you will have
    much time to speak Tjenen. You should understand the mixture of fear and
    respect you cause. You should understand that most of Ta-tjenen wishes you
    killed. However, since violent death is so unusual for us, no one is
    exactly sure what to do with you. Now the nestrexam will decide its own
    mind.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What is the nestrexam?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">You will find out soon enough. Come on, Alien.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer stood and turned away from Taljen. He opened the shades covering
    the windows, which he had fashioned himself. The Tjenens could sleep in the
    light. Stringer hadn’t yet managed that. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Please
    don’t call me that.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Alien? Why? That is what you are, simply. An Alien
    Murderer.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Yes, I suppose so. Then why have you been taking
    care of me?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Not to widen my ears, of that you can be sure. I
    found you when I was counting trees for a tree survey. So I am taking care
    of you.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Thank you. You have been kind. Now I suppose we
    should see the nestrexam. Tell me, will it matter what I say to them?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">No.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer puzzled about that as he stood in the meeting tent while it
    gradually filled, very gradually and even more quietly. People straggled
    in, and the elders who evidently made up the nestrexam wandered in
    similarly unconcerned with keeping the rest waiting, as if they were not
    aware that they <em>were</em> keeping the rest waiting. Finally a bell
    sounded from outside, and what little talking there was ceased as the last
    to enter took their places.
  </p>

  <p>
    An old woman whose face was marked with the signs of years, winds, and sun
    took her place on a circle painted on the floor in the exact center of the
    tent. Over her head, hanging from ropes, was that large square map which
    Stringer took to be the local area. The others sat in a row behind her and
    faced Stringer as Taljen led him forward.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">I stand in the Center for this house-change and the
    next. My name is Kenken Wer, although hopefully you won’t be here long
    enough to use it. We must decide what to do with you. Are you
    Polkraitz?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I don’t think so.</q> Whatever that was.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="elder">He would know if he was,</q> said one of the elders,
    leaning forward to Kenken Wer.
  </p>

  <p>
    She turned on him. <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">This is the Golun-Patra. Remember
    that.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="elder">I had forgotten.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">Ask the Time Keeper, then, if you cannot remember
    such things yourself.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The old man sat back meekly, obviously having made a grave slip. Kenken Wer
    turned her attention to Stringer again. <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">You killed a
    woman shortly after you arrived. This is serious. Life is precious at
    Ta-tjenen, not to be wasted. This is the first k…killing that I know of
    since the revolt. It is unclear what is to be done. Do you have an
    explanation?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I was confused,</q> Stringer said <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I thought I was being attacked.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">You were being helped.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I realize that now. Where I come from one isn’t
    helped.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I am not interested in your excuses. You acted as I
    would expect a Polkraitz to act. There is, however, some question as to
    whether you are Polkraitz or not. The opinion is divided. If you turn out
    to be Polkraitz, we will have to act immediately. Until then…</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer began to think that they were more concerned about whether he was
    Polkraitz than about the murdered woman. He lost track of what Kenken Wer
    was saying until he heard:
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">…so we have decided to do nothing. You may stay
    until the Patra. The teclads are shortening, as are the beclads themselves,
    and the Patra will come. If you are gone by then, you are gone; if not,
    then the Patra will embrace you. Taljen, you will be responsible for him
    until then. Let us know his decision.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Can I go to my ship now?</q> Stringer asked.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">Go,</q> said Kenken Wer, her long fingers
    interlocked beneath her breast. <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">I hope the Center
    does not see you again.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I’ll take you,</q> Taljen offered. She led Stringer
    out across the plaza, streaked with markings and small pylons, out of
    Ta-tjenen itself, and to his ship. It was as it had been a month earlier,
    at the base of the cliff—not so high, it seemed now!—tilted toward the
    right. The fern-moss underneath had turned brown, and a purple fungus had
    begun to creep up on the hull.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer circled around the craft and instantly saw that it would fly
    nowhere. The left wing had been largely sheared off, leaving a ragged gash
    at the stump. It would require a factory to repair that wound. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Well, I half suspected that.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen regarded the huge gash and ran her finger across one edge. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Does this mean that you cannot fly away?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer chuckled. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Of course—no, I guess you
    wouldn’t know. Yes, that’s what it means. The plane is broken.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">So what will you do now, Alien?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I’ll show you.</q> Stringer grasped the latch and
    pulled his hand back with a violent jerk. Taljen laughed. This time
    Stringer covered his hand with the cowl from his sun suit and yanked the
    hatch open. After waiting a few minutes for the cabin to ventilate, they
    climbed in. Taljen unstrapped her water flask and gave Stringer a drink. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Just one,</q> she said, smiling, when he asked for a
    second. Now he saw that the cockpit window had been shattered. Dust covered
    the console.
  </p>

  <p>
    As he sat at the communications desk, he explained while he flipped
    switches, mixing both Bitter and Tjenen words when the latter language—or
    his vocabulary—lacked the words he needed. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">We have
    a large rocket in orbit around this planet. Inside there are several more
    ships like this one. I should be able to connect the controls of this craft
    to one of the others left in orbit. Then I will be able to pilot the other
    here by remote control.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen said nothing. Stringer did not know how much she understood of his
    Bitter-Tjenen mixture, or even how much she understood of the concepts. But
    she did not seem surprised. Stringer began his task.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">You are unhappy,</q> Taljen said after a few minutes
    of observation, and she sat down on the floor behind Stringer. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">You should dance.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I can’t get any picture from the craft in
    orbit. Either it’s out of range or something is wrong.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Can you fix it?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer continued to work. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I don’t know what’s
    wrong. Nothing is coming through, that’s all. It might simply be that the
    ship is on the other side of the planet. In that case, I’ll just have to
    wait. Otherwise it might take—</q> Then Stringer realized he had no word
    for <q>day.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Stringer,</q> Taljen said slowly, but in one of her
    higher voices, <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I don’t understand what is wrong,
    what an <q>orbit</q> is, or how you are doing what you are doing, but I
    think you are in much trouble if you do not leave Ta-tjenen.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer gazed at her, as he always found himself doing before he talked to
    her. He did not understand the intonation in her voice, a mixture of
    concern and anger. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I know,</q> he said, tapping
    his forefinger on the panel. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Tell me, the old
    woman said life was precious here, that I had committed a serious crime. On
    my world that just isn’t true. But if it is here, then why isn’t any action
    being taken against me now? No one seemed to care about the woman, only
    about Polkraitz.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen looked puzzled at the question. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">The woman is
    gone. I currently knew her as well as any, I suppose. But soon I would not
    have known her, as with everyone here. It is just as if that time came
    sooner. Everything would have changed, anyway, and she would be just as
    gone.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer didn’t understand any of that.
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen went on. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">But if you are Polkraitz, that is a
    continuing problem. When they come, we do not know what they will do. If
    they are allies of the Gostum, the danger could threaten us all. So what
    will you do? Where are the other Aliens you told me about?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I don’t know. One you ate. Two we left a long way
    south—about a hundred thousand kilometers. Why they haven’t followed the
    beacon I don’t know.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">So what will you do now, Stringer Lost?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I must go south. It will take</q>—no word for
    years—<q ab:speaker="Stringer">a long time. But I can’t stay at
    Ta-tjenen. I didn’t understand most of what Kenken Wer said, but it’s clear
    that they’ll kill me sooner or later.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen laughed, but the laugh turned quickly into a frown. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I’m sorry, Stringer, but to go south is
    impossible. Why, one hundred thousand kilometers! I don’t even believe the
    world is that big. Even if you went, you would never survive.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Why not? If I built a boat—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">If the heat didn’t kill you on such a trip, you
    would freeze to death.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Now Stringer laughed. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What? This place is hotter
    than an impossible summer, and you tell me I’ll freeze to death?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen studied his face, scanning every centimeter of it with her eyes. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">You don’t understand, do you?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">No. I suppose I don’t.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen began to comprehend that perhaps Stringer really didn’t understand
    what she had always taken for granted. This Alien must come from a very
    strange world indeed. Now she spoke slowly and her voice was low. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Why do you think we call our world Freeze-Bake?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer laughed again. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Freeze-Bake?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Why, yes, did we forget to tell you?</q> Taljen did
    not see the humor that Stringer (and undoubtedly we also) found in the
    world’s name.
  </p>

  <p>
    He shook his head and saw a drop of sweat turn the dust on the console a
    darker brown. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">All right, why is this place called
    Freeze-Bake?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">The sun! Stringer, look at the sun!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer peered out of the cockpit and saw the sun. He blinked his
    eyes. The sun was below the tops of the nearby pod-trees.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Has it moved?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Yes!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    But so slowly that he hadn’t been conscious of it. Indeed, the sun, far
    south, was several, though not many, degrees east of its position when he
    had arrived and somewhat lower, too. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">So it does
    get dark here. No one bothered to tell me. And, of course, why else would
    it be getting cooler?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Now you see. Foolish Stringer, that the sun is going
    down and the teclads themselves are shortening. In less than two teclads
    the Freeze will begin. if you went south now, how far could you get before
    the rains became heavy, then snow and the winds like a crazed Verlaxchi?
    And then the dark. It is a Short Patra, this Patra-Bannk, the Time Keeper
    has told us. Nonetheless, it is longer than this Bannk. And it will get so
    cold that the air itself, I am told, is on the verge of falling out of the
    sky. If you started south now, you might make it as far as the next town;
    otherwise you would freeze to death in two teclads. You see, action is
    being taken against you. It makes things very simple, Stringer.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Yes.</q> It was simple. The sun was going down and
    taking the temperature with it. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What is a
    teclad?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen tossed her heavy hair, as she so often did. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">A
    teclad? One teclad is not like another, but there are six in the Patra and
    six in the Bannk. A Patra-Bannk is one pass of the sun, or suns. After all,
    it could be a new sun each Bannk.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer ignored the last remark. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">But you just
    told me that Patra-Bannk is the name of your world.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Patra-Bannk, yes. It makes much sense, don’t you
    think?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Yes, Patra-Bannk, Freeze-Bake; it makes much
    sense.</q> Stringer looked up from the panel to Taljen. Even he detected
    the weariness in his own voice. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Why didn’t you
    tell me this before?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I’m sorry,</q> Taljen said slowly. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I thought everyone knew about things like that.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What we assume!</q> Stringer muttered. But now he
    knew, at least, what Kenken Wer had meant when she said, <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">The Patra will embrace you.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Besides,</q> Taljen continued, <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I wasn’t teaching you for your information, but for
    ours. Tell me truthfully, Stringer,</q> she said, recrossing her legs, <q ab:speaker="Taljen">why did you come to Ta-tjenen?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What difference can it make now?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I would like to know, that’s all.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">It would seem because I’m Polkraitz—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen jumped up. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">You are?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">No, no.</q> Stringer quickly retracted when he saw
    her reaction. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I don’t even know what
    Polkraitz is. We came to find a great city that was on Patra-Bannk.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Ta-tjenen?</q> The question was asked with perfect
    innocence.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">No,</q> laughed Stringer softly. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I doubt that very much, even though Hendig is a
    liar.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Hendig? Who is Hendig?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">He is the man who had been on Patra-Bannk and then
    came to my world to tell us about the city. When we found Ta-tjenen we
    thought you might be able to tell us where it was, but we crashed.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen sat down once more and propped up her arms on her knees. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I am sorry that you crashed. You see, other than
    Ta-tjenen, there is little else to find. But tell me, why did you want to
    find this imagined city you speak of?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer was about to speak, but the words caught in his throat. He flicked
    away some of the dust on the console with his fingers. They left a smeared
    trail behind. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I…I think it’s time to get up,</q>
    he said, and pushed himself to his feet. Stand up. Stand up. You can even
    stand up. You can even stand up! The words flashed back to him again, as
    they had many times earlier. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Sarek! Why didn’t I
    think of this before?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Stringer, what is it this time?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Nothing.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Why don’t you say anything? If you want to learn how
    to talk like a Tjenen, you’ll have to learn how to talk. Those of Ta-tjenen
    talk a lot, certainly compared to you.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Why should I want to talk like a Tjenen?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Stringer!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">All right.</q> Taljen had helped him even though
    he was under a death sentence. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Wait a moment and
    let me think this through.</q> Stringer stood silently for a minute with
    his hand on his chin, staring absently in the direction of the cabin
    wall. Then he looked up and said, <q ab:speaker="Stringer">It’s
    impossible.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">What is, Cryptic Alien?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Tell me, what do you know about science?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I have been the Time Keeper’s assistance on certain
    free shifts. I was also his pupil during the Patras.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You never told me you study science.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">What have I ever told you, Stringer?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">True. I used to study science some, but no more
    than any kid, and that was a long time ago. I’m not a scientist, that’s for
    sure. But I just remembered an exclamation that I heard on Two-Bit long
    ago, in a place I’d rather forget. I ignored it the first time I heard it;
    it made no sense to me then and I let it go. Pike never mentioned it to me;
    either he didn’t believe it, which is most likely as Hendig is a liar, or
    he never thought of it. I don’t know. But it’s bothered me in my dreams
    ever since that first time, and now it popped into my head again. Now I
    know what bothered me.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Go on.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You see,</q> said Stringer, <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I come from a world very much smaller than
    Patra-Bannk, more than fifty times smaller in diameter—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">That makes Patra-Bannk very large or your world very
    small, doesn’t it?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Patra-Bannk certainly is very large, by any
    standards I’ve ever heard of. It’s more than six hundred thousand
    kilometers in diameter.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen shook her head resolutely. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I don’t believe
    you, Stringer Who Tells Stories. I can’t conceive of that.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">It is. And yet I am standing up. Doesn’t that
    bother you?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">No, should it?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Don’t you see? The gravity should be dozens of
    times greater than it is on my world. But it isn’t. It’s about the same,
    only a little more. I’m standing up; I should be crushed.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I know of gravity, of course, but I still don’t
    understand what you are saying.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Now Stringer was perplexed. The problem must be easy if he could figure it
    out. After all, he knew only the simplest science and those occasional,
    spectacular discoveries that filtered down to the level of Elswer’s. Why
    didn’t Taljen understand? <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What do you know of
    gravity?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">It pulls things to the ground.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Nothing more?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">What else is there to know about gravity?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Well, Stringer though, how do I answer that? I guess we start from the
    beginning, since I don’t know much more about gravity than the beginning
    myself. He began pacing the cabin back and forth, trying to remember,
    trying to form an explanation. Finally he looked up and said, <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Do you know that the weight of me, or of any object
    on this planet, depends on how massive the planet is and on the radius, how
    big it is?</q> Stringer held up his hands, shaping a ball.
  </p>

  <p>
    Something in that explanation disturbed Taljen, and she rested her head on
    her knuckles. After a few moments of thought she asked, <q ab:speaker="Taljen">But what if the world is very thin? If the gravity
    depends on the radius, shouldn’t it also depend on the thickness?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Thickness?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Yes, of course, the thickness of the edge.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer himself was very confused now. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What
    edge?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Stringer,</q> Taljen asked in a sharply modulated
    voice, <q ab:speaker="Taljen">what do you think this planet looks like?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What do <em>you</em> think this planet looks
    like?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I assume the model you were proposing was circular,
    like a pancake, but as we have never seen the edge, that might not be the
    case. I always thought a square was the most reasonable shape; there are
    four directions.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What? A planet is round.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Fine. What about the thickness?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I mean, spherical, like a ball.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen looked at him in total disbelief. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">You can’t
    be serious. People would fall off the other side from being upside
    down. And, Stringer, look at the ocean. Does it curve like a ball
    would?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">But Patra-Bannk is so huge.…When your ships go
    out—you have ships, don’t you?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Yes, of course.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">When they go out, what happens to them? Doesn’t it
    look as if they sink into the ocean?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">No, they get smaller and smaller and fade out.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Indeed, Patra-Bannk was huge. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Look at the sun; it’s
    a ball—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">A disk in the sky.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Oh, what’s the use, Stringer though. Aloud he said, <q ab:speaker="Stringer">And I suppose you think Patra-Bannk is the center of
    the Universe, too.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Of course. Ta-tjenen itself, as a matter of
    fact.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer couldn’t believe what he was hearing. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Doesn’t the fact that an Alien came here do anything
    to upset that belief?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Aliens came once before to the Center. That is why
    we are here. There is no contradiction.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Now Stringer threw up his hands in defeat, his great discovery useless,
    unexplainable to this stupid woman. How could she believe that he should be
    crushed by a gravity dozens of times that which obviously existed if she
    didn’t even believe the planet was round? And now what was he going to do?
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen answered that. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I think the nestrexam will
    want to know that you are to be here for some time to come.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    They walked back in silence. The shadow on the plaza crossed the four oval
    curves fashioned of metal and inst into the concrete. At one, the outer one
    for the lowest sun, stood a marker at the intersection of that low sun’s
    shadow and the metal scale.
  </p>

  <p>
    The tent was still filled. The elder looked up with some surprise when
    Taljen and Stringer entered. Kenken Wer rose and faced him. Her face was
    old, too old for Stringer to make a guess at her age, too old for Stringer
    to be interested. <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">You are still here.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    That was obvious. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">My ship needs repair. It will
    take time.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">As we have said, you, Called Stringer, will be
    allowed to remain until the Going Under. By then you will have departed or
    the Patra will embrace you. Do you understand?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Enough,</q> Stringer replied, and left the tent.
  </p>

  <p>
    A hand grabbed hold of him and yanked him about. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Where are you going, Stringer?</q> Taljen asked.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">That small red pylon marks the beginning of the
    Patra, doesn’t it?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">As you see, the scale ends there.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The pylon rising out of the pavement at the end of the curve was still many
    meters away from the sun’s shadow, but the shadow itself had moved many
    meters since Stringer had arrived. A cloud suddenly passed across the sun
    and cooled the air momentarily. Stringer wanted to laugh. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">In less than two teclads—whatever they are—I freeze
    to death. What exactly happens to Ta-tjenen I don’t know. But I think I’d
    better get to work.</q> His voice trailed off and he walked, hunched over,
    down the hill.
  </p>

  <p>
    Kenken Wer appeared and put her hand to Taljen’s shoulder. <q ab:speaker="Kenken Wer">Beware of that Alien, Taljen. Stay away from him as
    much as possible. There is no good in him.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen sighed as she turned away from Kenken Wer and watched Stringer
    walking away slowly, a slight limp still present in his stride. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Ah, Stringer from Elsewhere, you come as a murderer,
    are as silent as an escaping prisoner, claim you have never had an
    education beyond a Patra-Bannk, learn our language in a teclad, and ask
    questions of which we ourselves cannot dream. Ah, Stringer…</q>
  </p>

  <nav><a href="twir_5.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_7.xhtml">Next »</a></nav></body></html>