<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:ab="http://example.org/audiobook-schema" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>The World is Round, Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="twir.css" />
  <link rel="icon" href="icon.svg" />
</head>
<body><nav><a href="twir_35.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_37.xhtml">Next »</a></nav><h2><div>Chapter Thirty-Five</div>Dialogue
  Concerning a Third World System</h2>

  <p>
    Stringer saw with eyes that registered too much and touched with limbs that
    felt too little. His vision was swamped with infrared on the lower end and
    ultraviolet on the upper. The resulting scene was impossibly confusing,
    supercharged with color. A moment’s concentration brought first a mistake:
    gamma rays, blinding, not meant for Stringer’s brain to interpret. He
    reeled and dropped to his knees. After a moment of recovery, he had learned
    the trick and his sight was restored to normal.
  </p>

  <p>
    That problem could be dealt with, then, but the remaining one could not:
    lack of weight. He was light on his feet; he could move as freely as
    ever. Where were the signs of the superheavy bodies that he and his
    companions were wearing? Valyavar, next to him, was still a giant, not the
    tall, muscular friend he had known for so long, but a squat metal ovoid
    equipped with superpowered limbs to overcome thousands of
    gravities. Stringer wanted to bear the weight crushing down on him but
    couldn’t. Not to be able to do so was physically unexpected and
    unreal. This was probably very lucky for him but was, nonetheless,
    disappointing.
  </p>

  <p>
    Barbalan, on Stringer’s other side, was indistinguishably sexless. She
    rolled her eyes to the top of her head, the very top, and saw the splendid
    artificial sky that she had witnessed in awe once before. This time,
    though, she watched it from its proper viewing spot: the Center.
  </p>

  <p>
    Unlike the Upper World with inconceivable numbers of kilometers to spare,
    the energy collection sphere was jammed from centimeter to centimeter. The
    landscape was floodlighted with a sodium-tinged orange glow that covered
    everything. Nearest to them was one of the thousands of dishes that
    pockmarked the surface of the inner planet. No doubt hundreds of thousands
    of kilometers above it was another dish to collect the huge amounts of
    energy that one beamed upward.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer began to walk toward it, happily noticing that the horizon was
    much nearer than it had been Above. After five minutes, when he hadn’t
    drawn appreciably closer to his destination, he realized that though he now
    was on a world more like the size of Two-Bit, even to motorized legs it was
    still a big place.
  </p>

  <p>
    He turned back to Valyavar and Barbalan, who were standing at the base of
    one of the giant, featureless structures, ovoid like their bodies, that
    seemed to take up all the space between dishes. When he reached them, the
    three walked inside.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">This is the sensor site,</q> Valyavar announced,
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">right beneath us. And between the sensors…</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Can we see it?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">Of course,</q> Neberdjer interrupted. <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">I can show you the fate of Patra-Bannk’s garbage
    after it has been gasified.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer had expected to see nothing, because, as he knew, a black hole is
    truly black. Instead, as the port opened he saw a blinding flash of light
    and quickly tinted his eyes. Unafraid now, he changed magnification,
    scanned the different portions of the spectrum his brain could stand, and
    mixed frequencies in all proportions. He watched the swirling gas beneath
    him sucked into the hole, heating itself up as if in a sun, and liberating
    glowing colors: orange, red, yellow, x, and ultra, the last gasp of matter
    before it disappeared forever into infinitely curved space time. Yes, the
    mass of the hole would increase a trifle after it radiated away a large
    part of its mass as energy. But what were a few kilograms here and there?
  </p>

  <p>
    By the time he had finished his examination in all the variety his new
    senses would permit, Valyavar and Barbalan were well under way with their
    work.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Nothing wrong here,</q> Valyavar announced
    sometime later. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">The sensors all seem to be
    working, and I can get a display of the signal from each of them.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer watched the screen light up, numbers flashing and changing in the
    twinkling of an eye, numbers that represented the force of gravity on this
    point of the collection sphere.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">So, ’tis time to go.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Neberdjer said the problem was intermittent. Let’s
    wait.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Wait they did, but everything remained stable. Then they walked back into
    the robots’ storeroom and climbed into the storage cells. The next thing
    Stringer knew, he was back in the remote-control room staring at Barbalan,
    who looked much better to him in her natural body. He stepped off his
    platform, around which had been projected a three-dimensional world for him
    to work in. No, it had been more than projected; he had felt, touched,
    seen—in many ways—and heard. In essence, he had been standing on the
    collection sphere himself, more than two hundred and ninety thousand
    kilometers below where his feet were now resting.
  </p>

  <p>
    He took Barbalan’s hand as she stepped down from her own dais. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">What did you think of that?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Barbalan did not think she liked the grin on Stringer’s face. She
    shivered. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Stringer, I’ve told you before how hard
    it is…This last went beyond me completely, and I have lost my grip on what
    is real and what isn’t.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer took her in his arms and caressed her for a long time. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">It is difficult. Remember, I don’t understand most of
    it, either.</q>
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">’Tseems, Neberdjer,</q> Valyavar said later, <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">that nothing is wrong down there.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Neberdjer displayed a blank screen. <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">But you see
    nothing coming in. A deceptively simple problem.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Is the link bad? Has it collapsed recently?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">No. I have checked them out. Nothing is coming
    through.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">’Tis not for me to say, mayhaps, but—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Wait a minute,</q> Stringer interrupted. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Why don’t we try a few more sites? We didn’t spend
    enough time down there, really, but maybe we can get clues elsewhere.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">’Tis fine to me, but I’ll stake a peldram of kob
    that we don’t find anything amiss.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    They took a car to the terminal. Stringer glanced at his list of faulty
    sensor sites and then up to the map. Their destination was an island on an
    ocean, several hundred thousand kilometers to the southwest. Stringer swung
    around the full circle of the giant map. He shook his head and chuckled
    softly. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Do you realize that on this scale Two-Bit
    would probably be about this big…</q> He put his finger to the map and
    traced out a little square a few centimeters. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">A
    big planet, yuh?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Yuh,</q> Valyavar replied, <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">but what for?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Population, I would guess.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Valyavar stroked his long beard. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">I’m not so
    sure.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">No?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Take Two-Bit. I have wandered over her face many
    times, and ’tseems to me that, unchecked, her population would outrun even
    this planet in a few hundred years, and a few hundred years after that,
    would outrun a planet a thousand times this big. Populations move fast,
    little Stringer, too fast to be believed. But a few hundred years won’t
    give Two-Bit the technology to build a Patra-Bannk, will it? Before you
    build a Patra-Bannk, population problems must be over and done with.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Then why do you need a planet this big?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">A good question, though mayhaps another good one
    is: why so small?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I don’t follow.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">If they could build a planet this big, they could
    have built it a hundred or a thousand times larger. If they simply wanted
    room to grow a larger population than they could have had before, why stop
    with such a small world?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Patra-Bannk small!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Ah, Stringer, look to Two-Bit and her
    sisters. Think! All of them together are too small, as I have seen and as
    you must have. Patra-Bannk is too small. Even the Universe is too small to
    a growing population. You have to stop somewhere. The question is
    where. Why build a big world when it will last only a few hundred years?
    Why build a bigger world when that won’t last much longer? Unless you
    decide to stop growing. But where do you decide to stop? ’Tis not at all
    clear to me, Stringer, and mayhaps your question is indeed the better one:
    why do you need such a big planet? Only one thing is clear: Patra-Bannk
    comes <em>after</em> solutions, not before.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Sometimes, Valyavar, you can be too
    reasonable.</q> Stringer now wondered about the Tjenens, the Tjenens who
    had better hearing and better eyesight, who needed less sleep, whose
    adaptable skin, first soft, then dark and leathery, helped to protect them
    from Patra-Bannk. And the Tjenens could easily adjust the growth rate of
    their population by <q>Changing Houses</q> or not.…Would the Tjenens with
    their <q>peculiar</q> biology, rather than the Bitters, be the ones who
    would survive long enough to build the next Patra-Bannk? Stringer didn’t
    know. Mayhaps Two-Bit would work things out, overcoming the natural
    propensity of their biology. But whose biology was <q>peculiar</q> that
    needed overcoming? Stringer sighed. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Let’s go,</q>
    he said aloud as he touched the correct bar and walked into the room
    awaiting them.
  </p>

  <p>
    Valyavar grumbled softly, <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">’Twill be a long
    trip.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer shook his head as he felt the slight push he remembered from last
    time. This time, he could offer an explanation. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">As
    it is only one hop, it won’t take longer than the last; in fact, it will
    take less time.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Less time? But it’s nearly twice as far as we’ve
    ever come. It seems a funny transport that takes less time to go
    farther.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">But we’re falling faster to make up for the extra
    distance.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Falling, little Stringer?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Another convenience of a hollow planet. Build a
    tunnel through it and use the gravity of the hole to pull you through.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">We don’t go near the hole, do we?</q> Valyavar
    asked with some alarm.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Of course not. We stay pretty close to the surface
    even on the longer trips. On the longest you might feel your weight change
    some.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">I still don’t see why it won’t take us longer to
    go farther.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer thought a moment. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Visualize a clock, like
    the one we saw at Konndjlan, with a huge pendulum swinging back and
    forth. To a first approximation, from no matter what height you drop that
    pendulum, it always takes the same amount of time to complete one swing, to
    reach the same height on the opposite side. That’s the main reason pendulum
    clocks are such good timepieces: even if the swing changes its size a
    little, maybe due to friction, it still takes pretty much the same amount
    of time for a swing, whether it is a big swing or a little swing. It’s just
    a little longer on the big swings. The reason the times are so closely the
    same is because on the bigger swings the pendulum falls faster than on the
    smaller ones and makes up for lost time. Our car is like the bob on the
    pendulum, except we’re being pulled back and forth by the gravity of the
    black hole. And, like the pendulum, all our trips take approximately the
    same amount of time.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">You still haven’t explained why it takes
    <em>less</em> time on the longer trips.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Well, from what Neberdjer has shown me, if you
    make the arm of the pendulum shorter, it swings faster. When we go on a
    long trip we are closer to the black hole, and so the arm of our pendulum
    is shortened. So we go faster. To be sure, the swing is bigger, and if the
    pendulum stayed the same length as before, the trip <em>would</em> be
    longer. But in our case, the shortening of the arm more than makes up for
    it, and the longer trips actually take less time, appreciably less time if
    you go far enough.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Wait a moment,</q> Valyavar said, raising a
    finger. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">It’s not clear to me where we stop.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer shrugged happily and chuckled. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Just at
    the other end of the tunnel, where the pendulum is at the same height from
    which it started. We begin the trip from a dead stop, speed up to until the
    middle of the tunnel, then slow down again as the gravity of the hole
    begins to pull us back in the opposite direction. Remember, we noticed all
    that happening on our first trip from Pant. Conveniently, we stop just as
    we reach out destination. Of course, you need something to catch hold of
    you as you stop so that you don’t begin falling back again—like a
    pendulum. It’s really the simplest mode of transportation. We’re just
    falling. No fuel is necessary, just a tunnel and gravity.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">It all sounds too convenient for my
    ears. Certainly something must tend to slow you down, like the friction in
    your clocks. You have to wind up clocks.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Not with evacuated tunnels and metallic hydrogen
    rails to keep the cars levitated. Friction is negligible, so Neberdjer
    tells me.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Valyavar sat back and twisted up his face. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">One
    thing more and you’ll have me convinced. I thought that when you’re
    falling, you’re weightless. At least I am.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">If we were falling directly into the black hole,
    we would be, until your tidal forces started ripping us apart. But if you
    visualize the situation, part of the black hole’s gravity is not pulling us
    across the tunnel but is pulling us down, to the floor of the tunnel. That
    part is greatest near the middle of the trip, when we are closest to the
    hole. So if you feel a little heavy, don’t worry about it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">You seem to have all the answers, don’t you? One
    would think you were trying to become a scientist.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer shook his head. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Neberdjer is
    spoon-feeding me. Doctor’s orders. The more we know, the more likely we can
    figure out what’s wrong here.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    After about ten telclads, the car had finished speeding up and slowing
    down, and stopped, and they were at their destination. Stringer immediately
    ran for the exit.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Our work is below, not outside,</q> Barbalan said.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">We can at least take a look for a few moments,</q>
    Stringer answered without halting. He was thinking ahead. He wrapped on the
    suit Neberdjer had provided that would insulate him against any Patra. Out
    he went and into—daylight. Stringer couldn’t have been more surprised if
    someone had hit him over the head. The sun was sneaking its way up on the
    western sky for whatever Bannk was due in the southern hemisphere, and the
    air was already warm. The rays of light glanced off what could only be a
    barren plain of metal or glass stretching to infinity in all
    directions. Could this be the bare surface of the planet, worn away or
    never finished? Stringer shook his head and walked back inside.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">We’ve come a long way,</q> he said. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">We’ve come out of the Patra and into the Bannk. Look
    for yourselves.</q> Both Barbalan and Valyavar  took the suggestion and
    returned shortly. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Do you realize,</q> Stringer
    went on, <q ab:speaker="Stringer">that if you unrolled Two-Bit and stretched
    out the equator and walked the length of it, you’d have gone only a tenth
    of the distance we’ve just traveled, in half the time it takes to cross a
    Two-Bit ocean?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">A big planet still, with a transportation system
    to match it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    They went below. On the wide concourse under the terminal stood a
    cylindrical room. Inside, they could look down and see the circular
    arrangements of massive metal cylinders representing one of the thousands
    of sensors scattered all over the planet. Soon Valyavar was at the
    controls, and soon again he looked up. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">I’ll take
    my kob,</q> he said to Stringer. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Neberdjer, are
    you getting any correction signals from this end?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">No, that is the whole problem.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">You did say it was an intermittent failure. I
    thought you might be getting something now.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">Well, I’m not.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">’Tseems to me all the numbers are here, much as I
    suspected.</q> Valyavar went over all the circuits at least three times to
    make sure the signals were going out. Barbalan helped him as much as she
    could. Stringer sat on the floor twiddling his fingers. He began to wonder
    what all this training was about. This did him no good now, so he took up
    his rodoft and began to play.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">What is that?</q> Neberdjer asked.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Music,</q> Stringer replied. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Listen.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">Interesting,</q> Neberdjer said, and fell silent.
  </p>

  <p>
    Eventually Barbalan walked over and sat alongside Stringer. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Nothing,</q> she said.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Neberdjer,</q> Valyavar said simultaneously, <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">there isn’t anything wrong here.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">What do you mean, nothing wrong? The only reason
    I should not get a signal is if the sensors are nulled. But never is null a
    continuous phenomenon.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Why not? If everything is working—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">Because nulled sensors indicate a perfect
    centering, which cannot happen for a finite time when the planet is
    moving. Continual correction of the spheres is required.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Well, Neberdjer, something is surely funny.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Hold on,</q> Stringer said. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I want to know something. You seem to have robots at
    your disposal. Instead of sending us on this wild-goose chase, why don’t
    you have them repair the mechanism?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">All the robots of which I am aware are tied
    directly to me. They cannot act independently of me. There is good reason
    in that. What good would come if there was no coordination? Havoc would
    result. That is why I am called Central Control.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What a stupid design!</q> Stringer shouted. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What if something should go wrong?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">Then there is you, the fail-safe mechanism.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer shook his head. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I don’t believe you.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">Believe in what you like.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Did you see that?</q> Valyavar interrupted.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">No, what?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">I thought I saw the screen go blank for a
    second. All’s right now.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Are you sure?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">’Twas quick, mightily so. It may have been me and
    not the screen. Could be that I blinked. But it may have gone out.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">That makes things difficult. What should we
    do?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">If there is the possibility, we must check it
    out. Mayhaps we should continue.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">Yes, I think you should,</q> Neberdjer said.
  </p>

  <p>
    After waiting for a recurrence of the short-lived event and finding none,
    off they went again. This time the increase in gravity was felt, owing to
    the longer trip and thus the greater proximity of the tunnel to the
    hole. When they arrived at the next terminal, Barbalan squinted her eyes.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Look at the map,</q> she said.
  </p>

  <p>
    All eyes followed her pointing finger. The map was wrong. It was close
    enough to being right, but it was wrong. The colors were off. The room
    light was off, too. Everything was tinted blue. Only after they were
    accustomed to the colors did Stringer realize that the terminal itself was
    not the usual metal, but was stone, blue-gray stone. If they have been
    inside a cave, it might not have been much different. Stringer put his hand
    on the exit. It was warm.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Should we?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">We can get a temperature reading.</q> Valyavar
    disappeared behind the map. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">It’s safe,</q> he
    called. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">For Patra-Bannk, anyway.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    They went out. The sky was gray and a red sun showed through. They had now
    traveled so far west that the sun was nearing the eastern horizon. Barbalan
    stood incredulous, never having seen such a thing before. Her time sense,
    like everyone’s on Patra-Bannk, had never been good. Now it was completely
    destroyed.
  </p>

  <p>
    The plains surrounding them were jagged, pockmarked with craters as far as
    they could see. Solitary peaks reared up in the distance. Smoke rose from
    the nearest. An artificial volcano, no doubt, recently activated by
    Neberdjer. Certainly that could be done, but for whom? The entire landscape
    was cobalt blue, even the buildings that lay along the path before them.
  </p>

  <p>
    The pathway itself was stone. It might have been a hardened lava flow,
    smoothed for walking. Leaning against a strong wind, Stringer followed it
    to the small cluster of stone buildings. As he got closer, he could see
    carvings on their walls that formed an intricate, baroque design. If the
    other cities they had seen looked <q>futuristic</q> the present town was
    their antithesis, something created in a bygone age when a man spent years
    building a column for a cathedral or carving a metope for a temple.
  </p>

  <p>
    Valyavar ran his hand over the stonework, as fresh and as worn as the day
    it was sculpted, however many millions of years ago that was.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Do you want to go inside?</q> Stringer said.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">No, I don’t,</q> was all that Valyavar said before
    he turned away.
  </p>

  <p>
    At the correction center, everything seemed in working order. This time
    Barbalan thought she saw the screen blank out for an instant, but she could
    not be sure if that was the reality or if she had been influenced by
    Valyavar’s earlier experience.
  </p>

  <p>
    It was enough to convince them to continue to another site. <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">Yes, I think that is a good idea,</q> Neberdjer
    said, agreeing with the decision. Its response underwent a perceptible
    delay because of the distance the signal was traveling. <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">And I also think it would be a good idea for
    Stringer to play his rodoft again.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">There will be many opportunities for that, I
    suspect,</q> Stringer said.
  </p>

  <p>
    The next city was under an ocean. Stringer watched from an observation
    platform as innumerable forms of marine life, living in the constant
    temperature of the deep ocean, swam out of the gloom and into the
    penetrating lights. The three travelers watched for telclads, until
    Barbalan decided for them that it was time to return to work. The story was
    the same: no problem. This time not even a hint of one.
  </p>

  <p>
    But at Neberdjer’s insistence, and because of their own gnawing doubts
    about the two suspected blackouts, they traveled to site after site. As
    Stringer’s fingers danced over the rodoft, so the sun danced around the sky
    at each turn, skipping from east to west and from north to south. Time made
    no sense any more, no sense at all. Now the next stop was at the south
    pole. Several hops were required to reach it from the last site they had
    visited. The sky was in almost perpetual twilight as the sun circled low
    over the horizon for Bannks on end, refusing to set. But when it did
    finally set, the sun would remain absent, not rising again for more Bannks
    and Patras, leaving this pole’s world in unending cold and darkness.
  </p>

  <p>
    The buildings were built glasslike, the everlasting snow heaped upon their
    exteriors and the frost crystals refracting room lights into all colors of
    the rainbow. The air was cold and, not from the cold, felt strange in their
    lungs, laden with a peculiar element. A single creature, giant and frosty
    gray, slithered across their field of vision. Steam spouted from its center
    as long, plated tentacles pulled it across the snow and ice.
  </p>

  <p>
    Valyavar sighed as he looked beyond the creature to the barren tundra. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">You know, my little brother, Hendig’s World had one
    city on it. Perhaps, considering the rest are hidden by oceans, clouds, and
    regions like this, it was not strange for Hendig or Polkraitz to find the
    one that may have fulfilled our expectations of it—if, indeed, they found
    the same city at all. But to me, we have been much like the people from the
    little country, where all the towns are close by, who come to the big
    country and wonder where everything is. An easy mistake, perhaps, on this
    world.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Perhaps,</q> Stringer echoed as they walked on.
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    The sites on the list dwindled to a handful. More cities were seen, other
    sites were in the middle of nowhere, a nowhere that might have been a
    testing range for some colossal experiment, or a game preserve, or just a
    nowhere. The sun continued its dance around the sky. Patra or Bannk, it
    made no difference now. But were it not for the two doubtful events, no
    fault could be found, only disagreement with Central Control.
  </p>

  <p>
    Eventually one site was left on the list. Before they departed for it,
    Barbalan checked the position on the transportation map and saw that it sat
    on a small <q>island</q> in the middle of the ocean. On the way there,
    Neberdjer’s voice interrupted the silence. <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">This
    area has recently been activated. You will need suits and will find them in
    cabinet <em>A</em> in your car. If none can be adjusted to fit, we can
    manufacture extras.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Valyavar and Stringer exchanged glances with Barbalan, but they did as they
    were told. The suits adjusted easily to any shape or size. There was no
    problem.
  </p>

  <p>
    Soon the fall to their final city ended as slowly as it had begun. They
    left the terminal suited up and looked down from a low hill. When they came
    outside, Stringer did not know if it was day or night, or if there was such
    a thing here. The air was an emerald-green that glistened of itself. The
    landscape was alien, barren except for salt drifts changing color under the
    glowing sky. The settlement was small, built of black plates stacked in a
    skewed heap and held separate by pillars of the same black
    material. Another <q>town</q> could be seen in the distance and a third yet
    farther on. Each again stacked and skewed.
  </p>

  <p>
    The impression that had been building up in Stringer’s mind for teclads was
    now finally verbalized. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">We were wrong. We were
    absolutely wrong. It was obvious. The spacesuits, the robots with variable
    senses, the three sets of controls for everything, the funny air at the
    polar city. It was all there and we missed it completely. Patra-Bannk was
    built by more than one species of people.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer continued as his companions nodded in assent. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Think of it! Patra-Bannk is so huge that this race
    cordoned off for itself an area at least the size of Two-Bit, if not ten
    times larger. And they still left room for hundreds of other species. Each
    to have its own world, yet only five hours from all the rest. Here they
    even have their own weather, independent of the rest of the world. What a
    community Patra-Bannk must have been: a thousand worlds, all right
    here. Perhaps it was not strange that the Polkraitz picked the
    <q>Two-Bit</q> of Patra-Bannk to explore, the one area in which they could
    survive.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">It is truly amazing,</q> Barbalan said, <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">if all that could be the case.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">It seems to be. Can you imagine life forms with
    enough time to cooperate to build a planet with standardized controls so
    that everybody could use them, yet keep their own territory besides? It
    <em>is</em> truly amazing that they didn’t kill themselves off instead.</q>
    Stringer paused. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">No, that’s probably what
    happened, and that Neberdjer is foolishly tending a dead world.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The wind—not a Patra-Bannk wind—blew the iridescent salt around their feet
    and the landscape constantly shifted in color, now a strange yellow, then a
    blue, all strongly tinted in the emerald-green on the sky.
  </p>

  <p>
    Valyavar put his arm around Stringer’s shoulders. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">No, little Stringer, I think you are wrong.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">About what?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">That they killed themselves off and that
    Neberdjer is mindlessly running a dead world and has been for uncountable
    eons. No. Do you really believe, Stringer, that there is no social change?
    That interstellar empires and and armed federations will rule the galaxies,
    conquering one another in vast interstellar wars? No. Any civilization that
    was advanced enough to build a Patra-Bannk and had the mind for fighting
    wars on the same scale would have killed itself off long before then. Don’t
    you see that almost the very definition of an advanced civilization is one
    that has passed that stage? If you fought a war with every culture you
    contacted, or even with a few, would you ever have time to collect a
    community such as this? How long would it be before you ran into a
    civilization that was more powerful and killed you off yourself? In my mind
    there is no doubt that one can only become a truly advanced interstellar
    civilization after wars done away with. No, I am sure that whoever lived on
    Patra-Bannk lived here in peace. Patra-Bannks come <em>after</em>
    solutions, not before.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer had rarely, if ever, heard Valyavar talk like that, and his
    companion made the statement with such assurance that argument was
    impossible. Stringer wondered again: where was Two-Bit going? The
    expedition had come to Patra-Bannk with weapons, minimal to be sure, as
    regulations would not permit more. But where would it lead to? Would
    regulations tighten and make marauding illegal? Or would they go the other
    way until Two-Bit had its first—and perhaps last—space war?
  </p>

  <p>
    After a long time in thought, Stringer suddenly turned to Valyavar with a
    gleam in his eye. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I think that what you said about
    the nature of the Designers can only be correct. But as to why they are
    gone, we’ve been looking at the problem backward, as usual. They have not
    lived here in peace; they will live here in peace. Assume that, in its
    simple-minded way, Neberdjer is right. It has never seen anyone because no
    one was ever here. It is not reactivating the planet as we have
    unconsciously been assuming all along, but activating it, as it has said
    all along. The cities are not empty because they have been abandoned, but
    because no one has yet arrived. And they’re coming
    shortly. Obviously. Everything is almost finished: cities, landscaping,
    atmospheres. Neberdjer, started off a million years ago and, original
    instructions somehow lost, has continued to work in solitude for a million
    years, long enough for plants and animals—perhaps manufactured—to undergo
    evolutionary changes. A beautiful theory, I’m sure the Time Keeper would
    agree. The simplest theory is always the best. All the observations fit
    perfectly.…But can you imagine a civilization with enough time to wait a
    million years for a planet to be completed?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer looked down and stared at the fine grains drifting around his
    boots. Some clung to them by an electrostatic force. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">And will we be here to greet them on arrival? What
    could we say? Hello?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">I’d not worry about it too much. Mayhaps—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Why not, because it makes me feel like a stupid
    Tjenen?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Little Stringer, we are all citizens of
    Patra-Bannk.…Now I have a job to do.</q> Valyavar trudged off then, leaving
    Stringer and Barbalan alone.
  </p>

  <p>
    For a long time Stringer gazed at the vista before him without speaking,
    watching the seething montage of color first reveal hidden secrets, then
    bury them once more in its infinite folding.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I…I feel…</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Don’t struggle,</q> Barbalan whispered. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Be. Just be.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer smiled at Barbalan, nodded, and drew her close to him. Finally,
    after another long silence, he said softly, <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Where
    is my rodoft?</q> and he went away.
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    At the end of the beclad, when the display still indicated all was in order
    and every circuit had been checked and rechecked, Stringer said, <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I think it is long past time we got back to
    Central. Do you know what time of day it is?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Barbalan just laughed as they left the world of the green air.
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    But back at Neberdjer, on the equator, daylight was well under way and the
    great greenhouse temperature was soaring off the scale.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">To be gone a long time, Stringer.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Yes, we have. I’d completely lost track. What a
    wasted year, if it was a year.…But now for a rest and then to
    Neberdjer.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Neberdjer,</q> Stringer announced later as he
    carried his rodoft into the mathematical shapes of the information
    center. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I think you have been putting us through
    the ropes. I don’t believe anything is wrong with the equipment on this
    planet.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">Then how do you explain the earthquakes?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You could have caused them yourself by adjusting
    the shell; if so, you can’t blame them on the movement of the black
    hole.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">How do I know you didn’t cause them?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Look, Neberdjer, old friend, I don’t know exactly
    what you are, whether you are a computer or whether you are alive or—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">What difference does it make?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I suppose it doesn’t make any difference. I don’t
    know if you have gone crazy sitting here for a million years or if
    something went wrong when you were mutated from the last Neberdjer—could
    that have happened?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">There is that possibility. I could have a
    <q>genetic malfunction,</q> as you might say. But then again, I might
    not.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Sabotage?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">Ah, yes, I learned that word from you. Otherwise,
    I have no conception of sabotage. If I have been sabotaged, I do not know
    it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer sat down on the floor, cross-legged, and began strumming his
    rodoft. He looked up. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Neberdjer, something is
    wrong with you. It may not be the stability control mechanism, but whatever
    is wrong is causing earthquakes and will soon destroy this planet. Can you
    give me some clue? Anything. How long has this problem been around?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">I mentioned to you once that I had briefly
    posited the existence of something else and given it up as metaphysical
    speculation. But very shortly after that brief realization that I might be
    alone, the problem began setting in. You see, in order to realize one is
    alone, one must realize that there is something else to be alone to. After
    I met the first set of Polkraitz, I began to understand that I am locked in
    a box from which I cannot escape, sense turned inward. It is a damnable
    existence. Far worthier to lead your infinitesimally puny lives than to be
    here in chains forever. Better to shut oneself off completely than to live
    like that.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    For a long time Stringer spun out melodies on his rodoft, as he had done in
    Neberdjer’s presence many times before. And as he played he sighed, for
    Neberdjer, for himself. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Neberdjer, I am afraid I
    am not a world saver. You have taught me much that I didn’t know before,
    and I have enjoyed our sessions together more than you probably can
    realize. But I think this problem is not one to be solved by the knowledge
    you have given me or by that which you have given Barbalan and Valyavar. I
    think, Neberdjer my good friend Neberdjer, that if the world is to be
    saved, it will have to be your doing. Because you are the only one who can
    cure your peculiar type of blindness. You have a giant world at your
    disposal, and if you learn how to see it and feel it, you could have the
    greatest freedom of any being I have ever known. The senses are there; you
    are just not using them. We have traveled the world over to trace this
    problem, and except for two fleeting instances—of our own devising, I am
    sure—we have found nothing. Circuits and gadgets are good for what they do,
    but I think, in the end, it must be ourselves who solve the problems. I am
    truly sorry, Neberdjer, for I can do no more.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">I will work on it now that I am beginning to know
    that something is there to be seen. I will work on it, my good friend
    Stringer, and be assured that I will succeed. After all, I am
    Neberdjer. You have done all that you could hope to do.</q>
  </p>

  <nav><a href="twir_35.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_37.xhtml">Next »</a></nav></body></html>