<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:ab="http://example.org/audiobook-schema" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>The World is Round, Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="twir.css" />
  <link rel="icon" href="icon.svg" />
</head>
<body><nav><a href="twir_13.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_15.xhtml">Next »</a></nav><h2><div>Chapter Thirteen</div>Turn Back the Clock:
  A Girl Alone</h2>

  <p>
    Barbalan remained silent, breathing only softly until she heard Paddelack
    and Pike give up their furious digging and enter their tent. She was glad
    that she would not have to listen to them any longer. If they couldn’t find
    Konndjlan now that it was right on top of them, they deserved their fate.
  </p>

  <p>
    She started down the mountain with only her lantern, the cruel whistle of
    the wind, and her thoughts to keep her company. The way was easier alone
    without those two to look after but was still dangerous enough; a careless
    step or an unguarded moment could mean victory for the cold and wild and
    ice. But Barbalan did not stop to wonder if she would survive the downward
    climb or the fifty-kilometer trek she must make before she reached
    safety. Only one thing was certain: Death awaited her at
    Konndjlan. However, she had delivered Pike there, and there he would stay
    until the Patra was past. Now her job was to reach the Fringe, as Pike had
    proved so uncooperative at Daryephna. Would he even awaken? Had any
    impression been made on his mind at all? Barbalan did not know, and she did
    not know how to find out; she must search elsewhere.
  </p>

  <p>
    Her Gostum feet, strong and agile, guided her safely until she found
    <em>Number Two</em> at the base of the mountain. She unlocked the hatch,
    briefly found some food to satisfy her crying stomach, and undressed. The
    hot water of the shower was soothing to her nearly paralyzed legs, and she
    massaged them for a long time before she went to sleep.
  </p>

  <p>
    When she awoke, her legs were little more than immobile, the shower
    notwithstanding. But she had to go. A quick meal was all that she allowed
    herself before she readied to depart. Now she took off the necklace and
    knew that this was the right time to make use of it. She lined up the bezel
    with the westward-pointing needle and saw the arrow marking the direction
    to the stala. If she was off by more than a hair, she would wander in the
    night until she died. Dying had never bothered her much; on Patra-Bannk, to
    worry about dying when the possibility was always by your side was
    pointless. Except now she was bothered by the possibility, not by the
    thought of any unpleasant sensation at the end, but by the thought that
    something would be left unfinished. This was the first time in her life
    that Barbalan knew something had to be finished. So the thought of dying did
    bother her. If she died now, she would not be able to reach Pant and find
    the other Alien who had escaped there. And that was what was important.
  </p>

  <p>
    She wished, as she bent low in her struggles across the wind-torn desert,
    that her mind would go blank and leave her. Memories of the building she
    had stumbled on at Daryephna attacked her unconscious mind just as the sand
    whipped up and attacked her parka. She had only a vague recollection of
    what had actually happened: she had gone into the room; the lights had been
    on and she became unconscious. When she awoke she was starving, but someone
    or something said that it understood what kind of food she needed, and
    could make it, and told her where to get it. She stayed in the room for a
    long time, beclads on end, eating and sleeping…she wasn’t sure what
    else. When she finally left, there was a message in her head. It was simple
    and final: you cannot do it alone. Get help from the Aliens you know. Bring
    them to Neberdjer. Exactly what she could not do along, she did not
    understand; the words were not even in her vocabulary. She assumed that
    whoever or whatever the demon was who talked with her, he had discovered
    her limitations while she was asleep. Had she talked with him in dream
    language? In her own? What or where Neberdjer was, she wasn’t sure, either,
    so she had brought Pike back to the same place. He had crumpled. Had
    nothing of the experience remained in his head? Or hadn’t there been enough
    time? Was he just not talking about it? If she had been he, Barbalan
    wouldn’t have wanted to talk about it, either. At first the experience had
    not been pleasant, although afterward it induced euphoria. Or at least the
    dreams were colorful.
  </p>

  <p>
    So now the only thing left to do was to act on rumor. Rumors escaping from
    loose Fairtalian tongues after a loose time in bed. A third Alien, captured
    at Triesk, had been brought to Pant on his way to Konndjlan but had somehow
    managed to escape at the stopover. Barbalan wasn’t exactly sure where Pant
    was, which made her very unsure of anything at this point. She had been
    taken there once, blindfolded, so she knew it did exist. It was another
    Gostum outpost, newer than Konndjlan; only several belbannks had passed
    since it had been discovered by the Fairtalian and settled. In any case, no
    matter where Pant was, be it five thousand kilometers away or fifty
    thousand, that was where she was going, unless she died first.
  </p>

  <p>
    Telclads later, she passed the shadowy form of a large, craggy monolith
    protruding from the desert floor. According to the map, it was the only
    landmark on the way to the stala. She stopped there, putting down her
    walking pole which kept her from being blown over, and rested. After a
    little while, not wanting to waste time, she readjusted the bezel as the
    instructions indicated and set off in a slightly different direction.
  </p>

  <p>
    Finally, as unbelievable as the mountain climb, there it was. For once,
    Barbalan allowed herself a smile and was glad that she was a Gostum. How
    else would she have been able to pinpoint the stala in blinding sand and
    Patra? The compass? Perhaps that had helped, but being a Gostum helped even
    more. Her lantern revealed the stala to be a very large, circular
    structure, too smooth to be anything other than artificial. It sat on what
    seemed to be a large, raised plaza with walkways leading down it in all
    directions to—nowhere. She followed one of the walkways out, and it did,
    indeed, stop at nowhere. She returned by the same walkway to the circular
    building and found the entrance clearly marked. It took her a moment to
    realize she was actually reading one of the lines of lettering, even though
    it was in a completely unknown language. There were other letters, too, but
    those she still could not read, since they were in yet other languages. The
    sign was lit. It said: <em>Enter</em>, and she did.
  </p>

  <p>
    Naturally, it was light inside. The Polkraitz must have been wonderful to make
    magic like this. Barbalan wondered why all the magic was here and at
    Daryephna and so little was left at Konndjlan. All the work of magic there
    was left to Effrulyn and his antagonists.
  </p>

  <p>
    Barbalan at once recognized that the huge cylindrical map was virtually
    identical to the one she had seen at Daryephna. It towered over her head
    and was also so deftly constructed that the faraway points at the top
    seemed as close as the others. So this must be the way to get from one
    place to another. She turned her head and saw the lines crisscrossing the
    map. Somehow she knew how to work this thing. Both the necklace and
    Neberdjer had told her. It was now simply a matter of pushing the right
    buttons. But that didn’t tell her how to find Pant. From her pouch she
    fished out the card in the pendant and looked again at that curious table
    she had puzzled over at Daryephna. If its meaning was incomprehensible
    before, she could now at least make a good guess. Her eyes drifted down to
    the base of the illuminated world and halted at the rows of colored bars
    beneath it. Although no bar was labeled Pant in this new alphabet that
    suddenly seemed vaguely familiar, she guessed the correct bar from the
    pendant card. At her touch, a light on the map above her head went on. Pant
    could very well be there, who could tell? It wasn’t very far on this
    scale. To her left, underneath and beyond the huge raised cylinder, a door
    opened. Barbalan didn’t bother to hesitate; the only things behind her were
    the desert, the cold, and an unfriendly Konndjlan. The door slid shut
    behind her.
  </p>

  <p>
    The floor was flat, but the room itself had curved walls that arched over
    her head. It was big enough to hold twenty or thirty people, and
    comfortable-looking furniture was scattered about. She walked over to a
    cabinet, opened it, and found spacesuits, some like the ones Pike had,
    others not. Barbalan sat down just as she felt a downward acceleration,
    then a slight bump, a push, then nothing at all. Just silence
    now. Remembering her blindfolded journey, she knew that the trip would take
    some time and began to massage her legs. She worked herself over
    unmercifully until her leg muscles had untensed and her arms slowed
    themselves to sleep.
  </p>

  <p>
    Very nearly ten telclads later, although Barbalan didn’t know that at the
    time, a slight thud awakened her. A very short time after that, the door
    opened, and she thought she might never have left the other stala. But she
    guessed that she was now really at Pant. Pant of the north? North of Pant
    was the Fringe, hardly explored at all. Still farther north, so she had
    been told, was Triesk, even beyond the Fringe. Barbalan once again looked
    at the map to try to get an idea of how far one thing was from another; she
    saw that Pant lay about halfway between Konndjlan and another dot on the
    map. Was that one Triesk? She didn’t know. In fact, she didn’t really know
    how to tell which way was north or which was south.
  </p>

  <p>
    She tightened her parka and boots, less cumbersome than the Gostum
    quazzats, this Alien clothing, and left stala-Pant. The subfreezing air
    stung a bit of carelessly exposed flesh and she wrapped herself up
    closer. The Patra had not been with them long, but the snow was already
    deep and the cold was deeper. Worst of all was the wind, which could toss
    one to the ground and make each step seem a trial that lasted forever. She
    swung her lantern around and saw buildings everywhere, deep in snow. Surely
    the Gostum would be underground now, and she had to find them or she would
    freeze to death very shortly. On the other hand, if word had by then been
    passed on to Pant that she was a traitor and she was recognized, she would
    be killed on sight. But freezing was a certainty, the other was not.
  </p>

  <p>
    The wind howled and shrieked, but Barbalan continued the search—on her
    knees at times—until she found what she was looking for: a gateway. It was
    marked as such, as all gateways were. She rang the bell and soon the heavy
    wooden door swung inward taking a heap of snow with it. She stepped in,
    showing her necklace. Only Fairtalian could make the trip to Pant alone. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">I’m here with special orders to find the Alien who
    escaped. Do you have him? Was he recaptured?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The short Gostum facing her shook his warted face and quickly closed the
    door until it was open only a crack. <q ab:speaker="short Gostum">No. I
    know little enough about it. Do you expect to find him out there? I thought
    you were a fugitive Trieskan, the way you were walking about. The cold is
    only for unruly prisoners.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">That I know. Then I will have to stay here for the
    Patra until I can search for him at Bannk’s beginning.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="short Gostum">Then come in before you freeze us all.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Barbalan smiled and accepted the invitation.
  </p>

  <nav><a href="twir_13.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_15.xhtml">Next »</a></nav></body></html>