<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:ab="http://example.org/audiobook-schema" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>The World is Round, Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="twir.css" />
  <link rel="icon" href="icon.svg" />
</head>
<body><nav><a href="twir_31.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_33.xhtml">Next »</a></nav><h2><div>Chapter Thirty-One</div>In the Realm of
  the Gods</h2>

  <p>
    Where or when the journey had ended, Stringer wasn’t sure, but ended it
    had; and at the end, after telclads of darkness and constant acceleration,
    Stringer had seen lights ahead. The acceleration turned to deceleration and
    the ship silently glided into its berth. Barbalan did not wait a clad
    before she opened the hatch and bounded down the gangway. Stringer had time
    only to glimpse the rows of docked ships before Barbalan pressed her
    companions to the surface.
  </p>

  <p>
    The sun appeared above their heads, a small coronaless ball, seen through
    thick clouds. Stringer wanted to dart for cover, never wanting to see that
    sun again. But he didn’t start sweating or immediately feel nauseous. It
    was comfortable. They were in an enclosed area, a giant park, perhaps.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Is this Daryephna?</q> Stringer asked.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">No, definitely not. I assume this is
    Neberdjer.</q> Barbalan trotted off to a nearby road, inset a few
    centimeters into the ground.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">She seems to know what she’s up to,</q> Valyavar
    remarked as he slung his sack over his shoulder and followed her.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">As always,</q> Stringer added.
  </p>

  <p>
    A car awaited them. Barbalan climbed into the open vehicle.
  </p>

  <p>
    Valyavar cocked an eye at Stringer. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">’Tseems our
    journey has the cooperation of the entire planet. To go?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I’m not sure I like this,</q> Stringer said,
    glancing at Barbalan, who stood waiting for them.
  </p>

  <p>
    Barbalan took his hand in hers and helped him up. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">And I’m not sure, Stringer, that it matters whether
    we like it or not.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    They had only a brief glimpse of the city as the car sped to its
    destination. Kilometers of buildings piled within buildings, buildings
    overhanging buildings, towers and formless blobs flashed by before the car
    stopped.
  </p>

  <p>
    A yellow archway beckoned clearly. Its four freestanding hyperbolas each
    facing another betrayed a mathematical imagination. In its middle was a
    stairwell which Barbalan bounded down in a clad. The cross section of the
    stairwell was an ellipse, Stringer realized as he peered down the many
    levels to the bottom. Barbalan got off at the top level. Stringer and
    Valyavar followed and found themselves in a chamber whose wall traced out
    the intersection of many conic sections. The resulting curve, part ellipse,
    part hyperbola and parabola, was as perfect as the geometry on which it was
    based. A lounge splayed around the central staircase. The walls were mostly
    blank, but colors and textures ran from the simple to the complex and
    seemed to shift continuously. A row of strange-looking chairs lined one of
    the nearer walls, and before each chair was a simple desk.
  </p>

  <p>
    Barbalan grabbed Stringer by the shoulders and sat him down in one of the
    chairs, which immediately adjusted itself to his form. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Here you are. You are here.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Suddenly Stringer was paralyzed. A voice speaking in pure Bitter reached up
    to him from the depths of his brain. <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">I am glad to
    see that Barbalan followed my direction and brought you here.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Do you know her?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">Everything about her. She taught me her language,
    or rather, I should say that I used her to learn her language. From my few
    experiences with others, I would guess that she is highly intelligent, but
    not the one I need. Her educational and cultural background is not
    sufficient for her to understand what needs to be done. Her vocabulary does
    not even have the necessary symbols. Pike will not help. I hope you are the
    one I need. You must repair the stability control mechanism for this
    planet. It is urgent.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">The what?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">The stability control mechanism. The centering
    system. You do not understand?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">No. Why don’t you tell me who you are?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">Me? I am Neberdjer. I run this set of
    differential equations—ah, this planet, if it exists.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer blinked. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Are you Polkraitz?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">We all are. I am, you are.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I am?</q> Stringer sighed. Wasn’t there any escape
    from these Polkraitz? <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Why do you think I am
    Polkraitz?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">I met a group of them about ten-to-the-nineteenth
    light meters ago. They were very much like you—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Wait a minute. What do you mean, light meters ago?
    A meter is a distance.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">Ahh,</q> Neberdjer sighed, if that sound could be
    called a sigh. <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">An unfortunate distortion of the
    nature of things causes you to perceive the Universe to be divided into
    space and time, when in reality they are one. This sad and limiting
    distortion seems to be the result of your primitive nervous system. I am
    not so limited and live relativistically, thus perceiving the continuum
    geometrically, as it is meant to be perceived. You can measure time as you
    wish; I will measure it as it should be measured.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer was beginning to understand that communication was going to be
    difficult with this being.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">But, as I was saying, this group of earlier
    Polkraitz only ran away when I tried to talk to them. I had to waylay one,
    as I did with both Pike and Barbalan, but that one left very shortly
    thereafter, <em>died</em>, I believe now. Anyway, I got very little from
    him: he agreed that there had been an accident, that the party had to leave
    to get necessary supplies and would return soon to effect the rescue. Pike
    said he was Polkraitz, so I see you have finally come back to finish your
    work.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Well, Stringer thought, there go a lot of theories. If one assumed that
    this Neberdjer had misunderstood the message and that the Polkraitz were to
    return to rescue fellow explorers at Ta-tjenen, then a lot of things began
    to make sense. Clearly, everyone on this planet was descended from that
    expedition—Gostum, Tjenens, everyone. Evidently some accident had occurred,
    and the Polkraitz had left with the intention of rescuing those stranded
    behind but never had. From Taljen’s confused story, Stringer could extract
    one useful piece of information: the war had erupted over where to place
    the Center. Stringer guessed that this really meant a split had grown over
    whether to live at Ta-tjenen or at Konndjlan while waiting for the
    return—or after having given up waiting. Whether or not this new theory was
    the correct one, Stringer couldn’t be sure, but at least it didn’t seem to
    contradict any of the available evidence. Perhaps, in the end, Barbalan’s
    remark made in the darkness of their cell at Konndjlan was the most
    sensible: <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Who cares?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">Now, Polkraitz,</q> Neberdjer asked, interrupting
    Stringer’s thoughts, <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">why don’t you tell me if you
    really exist? Who are you?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Stringer—and I’m not Polkraitz.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">You must be. You are here for the rescue, the
    repair.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer desperately wanted to know what this was all about, but he
    couldn’t think of what to ask first. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">How are you
    talking to me?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer" class="no-close-quote">I am simply bypassing your
    outer ear, directly stimulating your auditory nerves and speaking to you in
    your own language. Previously, as with the earlier Polkraitz, I would talk
    on a very basic, subliminal level. I would manipulate the fundamental
    chemical and physical reactions in your brain that eventually become
    thoughts in your mind. I see now that this method requires a lot of
    energy. Twice now, I have tried to contact an entire group of humanoids in
    this fashion. The energy expended in getting the signal out was trivial,
    but the few who heard it only ran away. They were of no help
    whatsoever. The rest seem to have a built-in block to the reception,
    undoubtedly due to faulty instruction.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer" class="no-close-quote">In dealing with Barbalan,
    the first person with whom I had more than a momentary contact, thus
    allowing some data-collection time, I found that a reduced energy level
    facilitated communication. Pike was the last I tried to contact this way,
    and with him I used the parameters tested on Barbalan. However, the correct
    energy input is evidently a critical function varying from individual to
    individual, and I misjudged. I don’t think Pike enjoyed the experience.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">In any event, that is all in the past, and now
    that I know Bitter, I am talking to you as you talk to another human,
    except that I am bypassing the inefficient input stages. If you wish, we can
    proceed audibly.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">This is all right, I guess,</q> Stringer
    replied. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">So you are aware that people are coming
    into the city, here and at Daryephna, and using your transportation
    system?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">Aware. I am still not sure what that concept
    means. To believe that I am not the only being in the Universe is a
    difficult proposition. Once I suspected that others existed, at least in
    equational form, and that they evidently were acting independently of
    myself, I recalled that I had constructed certain <q>communication
    devices</q> such as the call box through which Barbalan recently spoke to
    me. Thus, granting the independence of these other beings, it
    immediately—instantaneously, by your clumsy nervous system’s
    standards—occurred to me that communication was a <q>physical</q>
    possibility. Up to that time it had remained an abstraction, since I had
    never actually communicated with anything before. The next question was
    whether it was useful to try to communicate. After a long and instantaneous
    debate, I decided to try communicating. But my language is totally alien,
    completely mathematical, so the humanoids didn’t even realize I was trying
    to talk to them and completely misunderstood the message. Barbalan was the
    first exception. From talking to her, I learned that I must keep energy
    levels to a minimum.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Surely you must have guessed that the facilities
    on this planet were built for some sort of people. In fact, I don’t
    understand why you didn’t know that to begin with.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">Why do you say <q>surely</q>? If you were brought
    up in a black room from the moment of your birth, would you ever suspect
    anything was beyond it? Once, after a great stretch of the imagination, I
    did posit the actual existence of something else, such as this planet, or
    you humans, but still treated them as mere fictions, analogous to the
    concept of a mathematical point, useful to explain certain concepts but
    which has no real existence.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer wasn’t sure he liked being considered a mathematical concept.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">After all, I get certain inputs used to solve
    certain equations. That is all. Why assume there is anything more to it? I
    have no memory of any previous Neberdjer meeting a people, and the
    observations can be explained just as easily without them. There is no
    reason to introduce such extraneous variables into the Universe. The
    equations are given. The rest is speculation.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer shook his head, subliminally. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I don’t
    understand. What are you? Are you alive?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">I am Neberdjer.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Where did you come from?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">The previous Neberdjer. You may say that I am a
    mutation, an improvement, a replication of the last Neberdjer,
    incorporating those parts of that being which it saw fit to include in the
    present one.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What about the previous Neberdjer?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">I come from a long line of Neberdjers,
    continually mutating. Record of the first Neberdjer is nonexistent.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Certainly the first must have come from
    somewhere.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">Why?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Everything has a beginning.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">How do you know? Where did the first humans come
    from?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">But—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">Perhaps everything you have experienced has a
    beginning and an end, but have you ever seen an atom created? Or, more
    accurately, a quantum of space-time? Remaining with the atom for
    illustrative purposes, do you assume an atom will end? Why do you assume it
    began? It seem to me a <q>human</q> problem, if I may use the term, and not
    necessarily a logical one. To posit the existence of a creator is clearly
    unfounded. Such speculations about origins only lead to infinite
    regress.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Enough!</q> Stringer yelled, if he was yelling at
    all. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What do you do here?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">I have been solving differential equations. If
    you are going to attach meanings to the equations, then I would say I have
    been building and activating the mechanisms on this planet for the last
    ten-to-the-twenty-second light meters, which is why you find some things in
    working order.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Which is why the transportation system can be
    used.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">Correct.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You haven’t stopped anyone from using it?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">Why should I? Once I discovered <q>aliens</q> and
    decided to try communication, the closing of the transportation network
    would have been a contradiction. The results, as I have said, are
    discouraging, especially because it was immediately clear to me why the
    Polkraitz, yourself included, were here to begin with.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">And why is that?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">The <q>emergency,</q> as you would call it. The
    first problem that I have ever had that was not <q>expected.</q> That is
    why you are here. The Polkraitz indicated they were aware of the
    emergency.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What emergency?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">I told you, you must repair the centering
    mechanism or the entire planet will be destroyed.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">And I told you that I didn’t know what you were
    talking about.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">This is odd. To keep the supercondensed body that
    lies at the center of the planet <em>in</em> the center.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What supercondensed body?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">The supercondensed body. Sometimes, when extra
    energy is needed, it is a naked singularity. But right now it is slowed
    down enough so that it is a black hole.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer gulped. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I don’t know much about black
    holes except barroom talk and nothing about stability controls or centering
    systems, so I think you’d better use one of your own repair mechanisms to
    fix it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">Don’t you understand yet?</q> came the voice. <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">You are the repair mechanism.</q>
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">Consider: I have never had an emergency, am not
    aware that other life exists. The two discoveries coincide. Furthermore,
    the Polkraitz said they were here because of an accident, said they will
    return for the rescue. Pike tells me you are Polkraitz. The conclusion is
    clear: you are here to effect the repairs, and something has gone wrong
    with your instructions.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Who gave us the instructions?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">As I am the only being on this planet, I must
    have a part of me with which I am not in direct communication, a fail-safe
    mechanism, you call it. It is easier than believing you exist totally
    independent of me. All I said, we are all Polkraitz.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Couldn’t all those happenings have been
    coincidence?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">Coincidence? What is a coincidence?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Never mind.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">Then I suggest you get to the repairs right
    away.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Barbalan and Valyavar saw Stringer rise slowly and drag his feet over to a
    hidden alcove in the wall. He returned with some bread, cheese, and kob
    and distributed it among the three of them. Barbalan and Valyavar ate
    hungrily; Stringer nibbled. Unexpectedly he began to laugh, first a slight
    shake of the head, then a soft chuckle, finally hysterical screaming.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Stringer!</q> Valyavar shouted when he could stand
    it no longer. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Sarek, what’s wrong with you?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer tried to speak between gales of laughter. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What a joke! A colossal joke! Cosmic repairmen,
    that’s what we are. We’re here to fix a planet. Valyavar, years ago you
    told me that I was coming to Hendig’s World to find God. Well, here it
    is. And what a God! It couldn’t make repairmen. Our creator. We’re robots
    made of flesh and blood. Programmed to fix this planet. But something went
    wrong. Can you imagine? You, me, Pike, Hendig, all unreal creations—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">How can you say that?</q> Barbalan shouted. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">What evidence do you have?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Because it is true. Those dreams, as if someone
    were trying to talk to me and I didn’t quite get the signal. It was
    Neberdjer trying to get me to—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Stringer, that’s crazy! Stop it, will you?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I’m not finished. I learned Tjenen incredibly
    fast, and my leg healed, and I figured out that the planet was artificial,
    and I learned to play the rodoft; I picked everything up like a fish taking
    to water. It was all <em>supposed</em> to be, programmed. For all I know,
    our pasts were made up by that thing with a warped mind. Two-Bit! It
    probably doesn’t even exist. How could a planet with a name like Two-Bit
    exist? Even the Polkraitz were made up, and we are Polkraitz. My past, all
    our pasts, phony—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Barbalan angrily threw down her food. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Even if
    that’s true—and you certainly haven’t convinced me that it is—what
    difference can it make? The past is just a memory, anyway, whether real or
    implanted. There is no way of telling the difference.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">But then my life has been a dream and not a real
    life—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Stringer, that is the stupidest thing I have ever
    heard.</q> Barbalan had lost all patience. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Programmed or not, only a real person could act the
    way you do. Now shut up.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer clamped his mouth shut. He snorted and laughed, but this time the
    laugh was directed at himself. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Well, you may have
    something there.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Only now did Barbalan remember her own odyssey to Daryephna, how she had
    been intensely curious after hearing Paddelack’s stories, how she had felt
    driven to the city. And only now did she remember about the ship Pike and
    Paddelack had found, the one they had told her was too familiar to their
    own for comfort. Barbalan paused to wonder if she had spoken too hastily,
    but she was not going to bring up the matter again. After all, the past
    <em>was</em> just a memory, and there was no way of telling the difference,
    real or imagined.
  </p>

  <p>
    Valyavar also had his thoughts, which he voiced with a low chuckle as he
    leaned back on the couch. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar" class="no-close-quote">Ah, little Stringer, your reaction strikes me akin to
    an old acquaintance of mine who, after surviving no less than six strokes
    of lightning, became an evangelist, claiming that he was the Blessed, and
    began preaching The Way.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Or, if you will allow me to continue, I am
    reminded of a scene I was once privileged to witness in a dingy flophouse
    over the Transhi. I was peaceably stroking my beard when I chanced to
    overhear a fragment of a conversation being held next to me. Two gentlemen,
    to forgive the usage of the term, were observing the meanest scoundrel
    you’d be to imagine who was asleep in a dung heap next to the door. Now,
    I’ll stake my peldram of kob that this little vermin, young enough to be
    your son, was the same who soon afterward appeared as the great Geerha Pan,
    who attracted millions with his disgusting and august dispersions. After
    much debate among themselves, the two men woke the boy up, discoursed with
    him at length, then let him to slumber once more. They took a long look at
    the reclining figure, toasted each other with teeth shining, and one said
    to the other in a truly unsalubrious voice that sent shivers up my spine,
    <q>You know, if they’ll buy this, they’ll buy anything.</q></q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer laughed. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">But those dreams and the Fear;
    how do you explain—? Oh, I guess Neberdjer wasn’t sure. Maybe the being
    will have better luck with you two. Why don’t you talk to it?</q> Stringer
    sat his friends down at the desk and left the room. He walked briefly
    outside on the street until he found an open area complete with small blue
    hillocks and red vegetation. Lying on his back, he could see the sun
    occasionally, unsuccessfully trying to break through the thick clouds of
    water vapor that were themselves dulled in color by the tinted
    enclosure. Stringer was grateful for that. It was the first time in many
    teclads that he had looked at the sun without anger rising in his throat.
  </p>

  <p>
    A tug on his arm woke him. It was Barbalan.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">It is a strange being that dwells here,</q> she
    said. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">I am expected to know much, I think, and
    Neberdjer is disappointed in the reality. But I also suspect that it is
    friendly, and I am not afraid of retribution.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Yes, I think that we are going to have to do this
    job the hard way,</q> Stringer agreed. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I couldn’t
    even fix a shuttlecraft; how does Neberdjer expect me to fix a planet?</q>
    He uprooted a small maroon plant and gave it to Barbalan. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">In thanks for your arguments earlier.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">What?</q> She smiled, taking it.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I…I think, for perhaps the first time, you made me
    feel as if my life was important.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">I hope I didn’t make you feel that. Feeling too
    important is dangerous.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I mean, you made me feel as if being alive was
    worth something after all, for its own sake. I’m not sure anything I’ve
    ever done has really shown that staying alive meant anything to me. When I
    was fighting Ta-tjenen to stay alive, I think it was more for spite than
    because I really cared for my own life. When I kill with the kalan, it is
    with such joyful recklessness that I can’t believe I really care whether
    I’m killed or not. Now I am beginning to feel a little
    different. Thanks.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Stringer, I have not known you long and hesitate
    to speak—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Go on.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">I have only talked to Taljen and have only seen
    your acceptance of what Neberdjer told us. I think, perhaps, that you are
    running from a history you allow to constrain you, refusing to believe in
    yourself, refusing to believe what your dreams tell you and blaming them
    instead on something else. Rely on your dreams; they are your clearest
    insights into problems. And, Stringer, I will never ask you about your
    past; the past does not interest me. But please, do not run from the past,
    but run toward the future. I can offer you nothing else except long-overdue
    thanks for saving my own life, worthless as it is. Pike was doing his best
    to send me to Verlaxchi.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    If Stringer ever blushed, it was then. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I…I think
    it was the easiest thing I’ve ever done.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">You were risking much for a stranger.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">As a girl who risked her life for me at least
    three times in the first beclad of our meeting, you stopped being a stranger
    very quickly.</q> Stringer pulled Barbalan toward him, caressed her, and
    sought her mouth with his. She wrapped her arms around him and they stayed
    together for a very long time.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">In circumstances of such great urgency, I can
    think of better things to do.</q> The mocking voice was Valyavar’s. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Come, Neberdjer wants to speak to us.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Once they were inside, Neberdjer spoke to all of them, audibly this
    time. <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">The three of you seem to lack the knowledge
    that I had assumed you possessed; therefore you must be trained for the
    job. Stringer, I will try to teach you enough to have a basic understanding
    of the planetary operations. Maybe that will help you in the discovery and
    repair of the problem. Barbalan and Valyavar, I will show you how to use
    any necessary equipment you will find. The process will take up valuable
    time, but I see no way around it. So let us begin.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Wait a minute,</q> Stringer said, waving his
    hand. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Why should we do this?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">The planet will be destroyed otherwise.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">So what?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">A good question. To answer it requires that you
    assume that black holes, tidal forces, planets, and ourselves represent
    something other than metrics, coordinate systems, and differential
    equations. I don’t know.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Stringer,</q> Barbalan interrupted, <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">I think we should try to help—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Help whom?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Ourselves, if no one else. Just to do it. For our
    future.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer hesitated for a moment, gazing into Barbalan’s pitch-black
    eyes. He nodded. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Okay, but, Neberdjer, can’t you
    tell us anything about who lived here and why no one is here now?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Neberdjer">No. As I have said before, all that is
    speculation. Neberdjers have been around for at least
    ten-to-the-twenty-second light meters, according to my internal sequencing
    clock, which runs automatically and is beyond my control. However, events
    in my own <q>subjective</q> memory run together and lose any time
    sequence. This phenomenon may be attributed to lack of external
    comparators, events with which to sequence time. If my clock is correct, no
    one has been here for a very long time. If memory is correct, time is
    totally subjective, all may be happening at one instant, now or in the
    past, and your question is meaningless.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Okay.</q> Stringer chuckled. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Let’s get to work.</q>
  </p>

  <nav><a href="twir_31.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_33.xhtml">Next »</a></nav></body></html>