<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:ab="http://example.org/audiobook-schema" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>The World is Round, Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="twir.css" />
  <link rel="icon" href="icon.svg" />
</head>
<body><nav><a href="twir_20.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_22.xhtml">Next »</a></nav><h2><div>Chapter Twenty</div>Daybreak in the North:
  The Journey Begins</h2>

  <p>
    Depending on who you were and what you believed, there were at least three
    ways of viewing the motion of the sun around Patra-Bannk. If you were of
    Ta-tjenen, all the Patras and Bannks were the same length—six teclads—and,
    timewise, the sun always climbed at a constant rate per teclad. If, on
    the other hand, you were Gostum, the Bannks varied in length and the time
    between sunrise and noon of one Bannk wasn’t even nearly the same as during
    another. Thus, the sun did not move at a constant rate; it moved according
    to its whim, sometimes shooting across the sky, sometimes—during the Weird
    Bannk—seeming to hover as though lifeless near the horizon for teclads on
    end before deciding to get on with its journey. Of course, varying the
    angle in the sky added a third possibility, and if you were Effrulyn, it
    didn’t matter and you could have it all ways at once.
  </p>

  <p>
    But, to a first approximation, you could say that the terminator crawled to
    Konndjlan and Ta-tjenen at the rate of less than one degree per Two-Bit
    day. The air became colder until the windows from the terminator started
    pumping heat into the dark side. And then the winds grew violently
    turbulent, as they had been at sunset.
  </p>

  <p>
    Finally came the sun, which a few hardy Tjenens witnessed. They had gone
    Above several times during the last beclad to make sure it was coming,
    because by Patra’s end, Alhane’s clocks were often off by more than a
    beclad, and Alhane still didn’t trust his father’s data. The sky was
    already light and the last stars had faded from view. Stringer found
    himself anticipating the day with a greater eagerness than he could ever
    remember having waited for anything. How many months in the dark? He
    couldn’t remember; months meant nothing. How many kilometers paced in
    claustrophobic confinement? Uncountable. And now the sun was coming, any
    moment now. Alhane was wrapped in quazzat, eyes on pedestaled transit,
    ready to call down to his daughter at the first trace of the sun so that
    she could set the master clock. Why weren’t all the other Tjenens Above to
    witness the event? How could they stay Below? Stringer wondered as the
    cryogenic air howled around his head and he steadied himself against the
    house.
  </p>

  <p>
    Then he saw the trace above the western horizon. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">There it is!</q> he shouted, trying to lift his voice
    above the wind. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">There it is!</q> He jumped and
    pointed. It was only the minutest of lines above the far plains, but it was
    the sun. And Stringer waited for the glorious sun to rise and illuminate
    the world, ready to bask in its life-giving rays. But it remained where it
    was, not moving, laughingly defying him. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Come
    on!</q> he yelled. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Do something!</q> The sun, as
    always, didn’t listen, and Taljen caught his arm and took him Below. Now
    Stringer understood why the Tjenens didn’t bother with sunrises.
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    It was now four beclads after sunrise, Killer Bannk beclads, a third again
    as long as those of the Weird Bannk. Stringer paced the Under
    nervously. Every minute, every second, every clad, belclad, and telclad were
    important now, but it was still too cold and windy for him to move. He kept
    himself occupied by putting the last touches on the sailplane. Alhane,
    taking time off from his new hobby, helped by painting an outline of a bird
    on the nose, wings, body, and tail. He said it was a solofar, a giant bird
    that Stringer had only heard about. Alhane wanted to call the sailplane
    <em>Bidrift</em>, which was a small cousin of the legendary
    solofar. Stringer couldn’t understand why Alhane wanted to call the craft a
    bidrift after claiming he had painted it as a solofar, but in any case,
    Stringer thought that <em>One Shot</em> was a more appropriate name. Alhane
    refused to be pessimistic, and they compromised by calling the sailplane
    <em>Nothing</em>.
  </p>

  <p>
    In the end, even that chore was finished, and Stringer could only pace or
    play his rodoft for the dances. But his heart was not in the music, if it
    ever had been.
  </p>

  <p>
    When finally someone entered the communal room and announced that it was
    time to go Above, Stringer almost threw his rodoft in the air. Candles were
    lit and lines to the Gateway were formed. Stringer marched out among the
    chatty Tjenens, warmly dressed, holding his candle. The attendant at the
    Gateway was about to extinguish Stringer’s candle as he emerged, but a gust
    of wind blew it out beforehand. So goes the ceremony, Stringer thought
    happily.
  </p>

  <p>
    He watched the Tjenens disperse, the constant talk turning to silence as
    they emerged from the tunnel. They gathered into their appropriate
    nestrexas and set about finding their new houses.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer looked about him. The roof of the meeting tent was almost gone; he
    himself had seen it fall. In fact, most of Ta-tjenen seemed to be
    leveled. The nearest houses were all either completely collapsed or rent by
    huge gashes in their sides. Pieces of netting were strewn over the ground
    as far as he could see, and bits of wood were tuck into the frozen snow. At
    his feet, any bare spots on the plaza showed new cracks from expanding ice
    during the long Short Patra. The pod-trees around the park were, for the
    most part, still erect, except for a few unlucky ones, and they were all
    still closed, insulating resin completely solid. The Tjenens would have
    much resurrecting to do. Stringer walked around, climbed up to the numerous
    reservoirs that opened below, peered in, and saw ice.
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen found him later. Already her skin, like that of a chameleon, had
    darkened several shades, and her eyes were no longer the light blue of the
    Patra. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Will you help with the repairs?</q> she asked
    him.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I have work of my own to do.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Stringer, you can do nothing quite yet. Help with
    the repairs. You are in Ta-tjenen still, and at Bannk’s beginning everyone
    helps with the repairs. Everyone. And do not be anxious. This is not a
    Bannk to look forward to, especially in our solofar.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">All right.</q> Stringer gave in. He glanced
    briefly to the west and was glad to see more of the sun.
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    Another two beclads passed before the town looked any cleaner and before
    Stringer dared take out the sailplane. He detached the wings and searched
    out Alhane. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">How are we going to get it
    outside?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">The door, obviously. Look here, Stringer.</q> Alhane
    showed him a door in the old storeroom that Stringer had not noticed all
    Patra. It opened to a sheltered spot not halfway up the hill on which
    Ta-tjenen sat.
  </p>

  <p>
    The Time Keeper’s children were called upon to help, as was Taljen, and the
    craft was carefully taken out of the storeroom and down the hill. They
    loaded it onto a large flat cart, and Stringer watched Alhane’s son, whose
    name was Alhen, whip the grask into action. The five of them walked down
    the shore road to the east as the glider made its first short journey. On
    the last rise before the sea Stringer saw the frozen ocean. Indeed, it was
    visible from the top of Ta-tjenen, but Stringer had not noticed it. He
    noticed it now, though, a vast, unbroken plain of frosty white stretching
    interminably. Only near the edge of the beach was water beginning to replace
    ice as the yellow sun crawled up into the air.
  </p>

  <p>
    In a short while the wings were securely in place and Stringer was sitting
    in the cockpit. Long, light cables from the shuttle connected the glider to
    the grask team on the beach, leaving thin trails in fast-melting snow and
    mud.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Do you want to try it, Stringer? It is still very
    windy.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">It will always be very windy!</q> Stringer shouted
    in reply and bit his lip.
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane shut the hood over Stringer’s head and waved to the others on the
    beach.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer saw the cables grow taut and felt the glider begin to slide across
    the ground. The wind buffeted the plane and he had to force himself to
    relax. The ground grated by and suddenly there was no more sound. Stringer
    looked down; he was in the air. A push of the lever and the cables were
    gone. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Up! Up!</q> he urged. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Take me up!</q> He felt the controls in his
    hands. They felt good; it had been a long time. A little too much roll this
    way, a tendency to slip that way. The rudder was stiff; the elevators, a
    little sticky. Stringer made mental notes as he watched the ground below
    him streak by. He found a current of rising air and soared. He found an air
    wave over a hill and rose higher. He had to exercise great restraint in
    order not to fly away right then and leave Ta-tjenen behind him forever. He
    searched for a landing spot and hit the wind crosswise. The plane lurched
    and slipped. He tightened his grip on the stick and remembered rusted skills
    not used for Patra-Bannks. The landing was rough, the ground came up fast,
    but <em>Nothing</em> bounced twice on its wheel and slid to a halt,
    undamaged. Stringer pushed the hood back and looked around. He saw his
    friends come riding down the beach on graskback. Snow and dirt were flung
    into the air behind flying hooves.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">You did it!</q> the Time Keeper cried.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">How was it?</q> Taljen yelled as she dismounted.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer was backslapped by all. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Rough wind. But
    it flew and that’s good. We have to make some adjustments yet. And with you
    in it.</q>
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    Stringer worked constantly for a beclad on trimming the sailplane for
    flight. He forced himself to go without sleep as the sun urged him on with
    its headlong chariot ride into heaven. Why couldn’t that sun move at a
    constant rate? Always too fast when time was scarce and too slow when he
    didn’t need it. The line of ice was receding from the beach as the sun’s
    heat turned it into freezing water, and the snow on the beach was almost
    gone now, fast melting into nothing. Stringer eventually satisfied himself
    that he had a plane that would handle well and had a glide ratio of at
    least twenty to one, not good for a Two-Bit glider, which easily made
    seventy or eighty, but respectable for a homemade monster. He took one more
    look at the sun and the beach and the snow and knew it was time to leave.
  </p>

  <p>
    He walked briskly to the shuttle for his tent and grasers. Even before he
    entered, he remembered the exile and climbed anxiously into the craft. In
    the cargo compartment, empty ration packets were neatly stacked up on one
    side, and his tent, rolled into its sack, was laid across two
    seats. Stringer checked all the compartments and the latrine. They were
    empty.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Well, good luck to us,</q> he said, and departed.
  </p>

  <p>
    Shortly after Stringer reached the beach, the crowd began to form. He
    glanced at Taljen and she nodded. Word traveled quickly indeed in
    Ta-tjenen. He did not recognize any faces at this distance. He wondered how
    many were friends, those for whom he had played the rodoft, and he wondered
    how many were enemies, those who thought of him as an evil Polkraitz come
    back to destroy them. He was sure that most would be happy to have him
    leave, and he was glad to oblige.
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane walked along the crowded road on his way to the beach and mingled
    with the spectators.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">I’ll bet you are glad to see him off, Time
    Keeper,</q> Benjfold said in his rising voice.
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane sighed at the young man. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Glad? I don’t know,
    even if you do. The Alien asked interesting questions, which no one else
    here asks. But he was troublesome, even I will admit to that.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">Troublesome! I hope this insane trip kills him for
    his gift of troubles!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Not a child’s punishment, this trip, whether the sun
    acts benevolently or not.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">Does he deserve a child’s punishment? After
    killing the girl—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">You speak strangely, Benjfold.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">Is it any wonder? The Alien has done this to all
    of us. He tried to kill me, you remember—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">—and even myself.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">You?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Yes,</q> Alhane chuckled. <q ab:speaker="Alhane">It
    was near the end of the Bannk when we found the exile Above. Stringer
    helped him by sheltering him in the shuttle—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">Are you telling the truth?</q> Benjfold cried.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">I have no reason not to.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Benjfold">Then he must be stopped now! Immediately! He is
    Polkraitz in league with the Gostum and must be stopped!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">But—</q> Alhane raised his arm, but Benjfold had
    already lost himself among the throngs of people.
  </p>

  <p>
    Alhane did not try to find Benjfold to reason with him, nor Kenken Wer to
    stop what he knew would shortly be a disaster. He ran out to the beach,
    struggling over his slight limp until he reached the glider. The crowd was
    already moving in his direction.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Stringer, you must go now! Go! Hurry! Don’t wait or
    you’ll be killed. The found out about the exile. It was my fault. Go! Go!
    Don’t wait for the sun!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer saw Benjfold break away from the crowd and begin running toward
    them.
  </p>

  <p>
    He nodded sharply to Alhane and got into the cockpit, where Taljen was
    already waiting.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Remember to keep a record for me, Stringer!</q>
    Alhane said, patting Stringer on the back with one hand and signaling to
    the waiting grask team with the other. He stepped back just in time to
    avoid the tail of the moving sailplane and being hit by a rock thrown from
    the mob.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Alhane">Rise, <em>Bidrift</em>, rise!</q> Alhane shouted
    from the ground.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Up, <em>Nothing!</em> Sarek, get up!</q> Stringer
    urged from the cockpit. He saw the crowd approaching from the corner of his
    eye and winced. When he dared look again, they were falling behind with the
    ground. A flick of the release lever and the glider was free; a rising air
    current discovered and they were up; the southerly wind caught and they
    were away. Stringer allowed himself a deep sigh of relief, but Taljen
    remained tense.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">You have two things to explain to me, Stringer,</q>
    she said from behind him. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">One is what that was all
    about, and the other is how to fly this bird.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I helped the man who was left Above for the
    Patra. They just found out.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Although Stringer couldn’t see Taljen, her face grew pale and she pressed
    her hands over her eyes. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">You didn’t,</q> was all she
    could say.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer grinned, purposely sardonic. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">How does it
    feel to be cooped up with a Polkraitz traitor?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen sucked in her breath. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Teach me to operate
    this bird.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer nodded to himself. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Yes, Ta-tjenen is
    behind us now.</q>
  </p>

  <nav><a href="twir_20.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_22.xhtml">Next »</a></nav></body></html>