<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:ab="http://example.org/audiobook-schema" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>The World is Round, Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="twir.css" />
  <link rel="icon" href="icon.svg" />
</head>
<body><nav><a href="twir_22.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown-top" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown-top&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_24.xhtml">Next »</a></nav><h2><div>Chapter Twenty-Two</div>The Road to
  Cathay</h2>

  <blockquote ab:speaker="Stringer">
    <p>
      <strong>Entry 1:</strong> Alhane wanted me to keep a journal. What do I say
      to a journal? I guess I will talk about the trip. Even that seems
      pointless. What is done is done. No one will ever know or care. So why
      write about it?
    </p>

    <p>
      Patra-Bannk is made for soaring, even though the wind is still rough, so
      I must be on my guard. We had little trouble reaching Glintz, where I am
      now. The main thing is to guess how far inland the air starts rising and
      find the waves.
    </p>

    <p>
      At Glintz everyone recognized me as an Alien immediately. Even if I hide
      my hands with only ten fingers, this Bannk everyone’s skin is getting
      dark and scaly, and there is no disguise I will always talk like an
      Alien. My voice isn’t flexible enough to make all the Tjenen sounds
      correctly. This problem is biological.
    </p>

    <p>
      Taljen doesn’t want to talk to me. I think she still believes I am
      Polkraitz. Otherwise I am in high spirits and am sure the trip will
      succeed. One thing I forgot to tell Taljen: the last twenty thousand
      kilometers on my map showed no villages. Either we fly that gap in one
      hop or we wait till next Bannk and sail by boat.
    </p>
  </blockquote>

  <blockquote ab:speaker="Taljen">
    <p>
      <strong>Dear Alhane:</strong> I have also decided to keep a journal and
      address it to you. I am terribly frightened, frightened out of my wits. I
      have left my home, my friends, all that has made me feel safe and
      wanted. Now I am flying south in a mechanical bird that at times seems as
      if it could be snapped in two by an angry wind, flying south with an
      Alien who could easily have come here to destroy us all. I want to
      believe he is to be trusted, but he seems to haunt me, enjoying his
      ambiguity. I am ripped apart. Why am I doing this to myself? Is it to
      prove your theory wrong? Is it to prove that Ta-tjenen is indeed the
      might Ta-tjenen I had always thought? I am compelled to go with
      Stringer. But I need him to hold me, to give me shelter, and he so rarely
      does. I admire his ability to stand alone. I wish we could stand
      together. Oh, Alhane, Time Keeper, I do not want to vanish off the Edge
      of the World. I pray that your shadows are right; I pray that they are
      wrong.</p>
  </blockquote>

  <p>
    The campfire was nearly invisible in the bright morning light, but the
    deceptive time did not prevent Stringer from being exhausted after the
    flight from Ta-tjenen. He wanted to collapse into sleep, but the men and
    women to Glintz gathered around and pumped him with questions.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Glintz man">Do you mean you came all the way from Ta-tjenen
    in that solofar?</q> one of the men asked.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Yes, we did, and will go much farther still.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Glintz man">How long did it take?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">A third of a beclad, perhaps. I’m not sure.</q>
    Stringer answered.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Glintz man 2">Surely that is a thief’s tale,</q> another man
    offered.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Glintz man 3">We should build one ourselves and go to
    Ta-tjenen.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Glintz man 4">Who wants to go to Ta-tjenen?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The discussion was too lively for Stringer, and he kept tossing off sleep
    with a shake of the head. The man nearest him leaned over. <q ab:speaker="Fent">Come. You two can sleep in my house and rest.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The house was small and everything about it was highly ornate. The walls
    were covered with paintings, unframed, colors colliding head-on. The giant
    montage of nudes, abstractions, everyday scenes, was so complex that
    Stringer could not sort it out. Jugs of water sat on the floor, unglazed
    so they would sweat and thereby cool their contents, but nevertheless
    ringed with angular scrollwork from top to bottom. A bookshelf, too, with
    bound volumes, stood from floor to ceiling. Stringer squinted around him,
    never having seen anything like this in Ta-tjenen except for the Time
    Keeper’s house.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Fent">My grandfather lived here and painted those. He was
    also a great collector of books.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer’s drowsiness lifted suddenly. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You know
    who your grandfather was and that he lived in this house?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The man, who was twice as old as Stringer, smiled. <q ab:speaker="Fent">Ah,
    you are from Ta-tjenen, that is right, even though you haven’t enough
    fingers and your speech is spastic. Glintz was founded by those who didn’t
    like the Parlztluzan and thus left Ta-tjenen. We have never used that
    system. And, as a result, you see that Glintz is much smaller than
    Ta-tjenen, or so I’ve been told. Of course, brief conjugal visits are
    sometimes necessary.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer didn’t understand that, but was too tired to get into another
    discussion now. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What is your name?</q> he asked.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Fent">Fent. Fent of Glintz, you can call me.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">All right, I will.</q> Stringer took Taljen’s arm
    and they were led into the next room. They slept very soundly. Stringer
    awoke to Taljen’s embrace. She hugged him passionately, pulling his body
    closer to hers than ever before. He thought his back would break and he
    responded with eagerness. For a moment he forgot the time, the nebulous
    time on Patra-Bannk of which he was never certain, but which was always
    urging him on, pressing him southward.
  </p>

  <p>
    Aftersex, when they had gotten up and dressed, he said to Taljen, <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I’m glad you aren’t angry at me any more.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen hardly looked at him as she said matter-of-factly, <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I think part of me was trying to kill you.</q> Stringer
    slumped back onto the floor and silently watched her walk into the
    wind-scattered sunlight.
  </p>

  <p>
    They had one more quick meal at Glintz. When the eating was done, Stringer
    said to Fent, <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I can offer you little in return for
    your hospitality other than a tune on my rodoft.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Fent">An excellent exchange!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer played. His fingers were one with the instrument; his libido
    manifested itself in the energy of the music. For another moment he forgot
    the time and the sun at his back.
  </p>

  <p>
    At the end, Fent slapped his knees. <q ab:speaker="Fent">You are a master!
    But your tunes are not those of Ta-tjenen.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I am not of Ta-tjenen, so my tunes are
    different.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Fent">That you are not from Ta-tjenen is clear. Where are
    you from?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer liked Fent. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I’m not sure myself any
    more,</q> he said softly.
  </p>

  <p>
    On the way to the beach they passed through the town. Nestled in the woods,
    all the houses were lively and gaily painted. Stringer thought that
    reckless in the face of the Bannk, the Killer Bannk; reds and blues
    absorbed heat.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Fent">Don’t worry,</q> said Fent. <q ab:speaker="Fent">As
    the Bannk wears on, we put the white sheet out. But a dreary white city is
    not a crumb snatcher’s price to pay to lower the temperature a handful of
    degrees.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You’re right,</q> Stringer agreed. By this time
    they were at the sailplane, and Fent helped Stringer and Taljen into the
    cockpit. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I hope to see you again,</q> Stringer
    said, at once realizing the hopelessness of the remark.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Fent">Yes, we will see each other, Stringer Who Is from
    Ta-tjenen but Not.</q> Stringer knew that Fent had no conception of what
    lay ahead for him and Taljen, if that were something possible to conceive
    at all.
  </p>

  <p>
    Boats by the hundreds had been pulled up on the beach from the still
    largely frozen ocean. Now they were cleared out of the way to make a runway
    for the sailplane. Men who had been fishing out on the ice came to watch
    the launch, and the beach was soon lined with thousands of spectators. The
    grask team had been waiting for Stringer’s final command, and now, after
    last-minute instructions, he gave it to them. In a moment they were
    airborne. Stringer took a turn around the town in a farewell salute and
    soared southward.
  </p>

  <p>
    They watched the ice far below break up as the Bannk grew older. Small
    puffy clouds were beginning to form inland, and the prevailing winds were
    shifting south.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Always keep an eye on the clouds,</q> Stringer
    explained to Taljen. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">They are our only markers for
    finding rising air. And watch the hills. We’ll ride the air currents over
    the hills. We need all the help we can get.</q> Taljen remained
    silent. Finally Stringer said, <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Tell me, Glintz
    does not have the Parlztluzan; why do you have it?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Or why don’t they have it?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Taljen, I’d be interested to know either way. The
    <q>Changing of Houses</q> is the strangest thing I’ve ever heard of.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You don’t have it, either?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Of course not.</q> Stringer did not wait for the
    silence this time. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">But if you know the reason for
    its existence, I’d like you to tell me.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen began slowly. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I am told that it was organized
    after the war against the Gostum when the Polkraitz left. The population
    was decimated, and this would help restore it. Those who disagreed went to
    Glintz. You see that Glintz is much smaller than Ta-tjenen.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer mulled that over for a while. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I don’t see
    what difference it can make whether or not you rotate mates, as far as the
    number of children produced.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">All right, then, I will explain it to you as if you
    were a child. You know that Ta-tjenen runs on clocks—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">—or ignores them.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Everything runs on clocks, not necessarily
    mechanical. Everything has its own cycle. Some cycles are long, like the
    fertility cycles of males and females. In order to produce children, both
    clocks must be on, both cycles must be matched. That does not happen very
    often if mates are not switched. The clocks must be synchronized at the
    Parlztluzan.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Men have breeding cycle?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Of course. Don’t you?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">We are always <q>on.</q></q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">So, you see,</q> Taljen said, ignoring the last
    remark, <q ab:speaker="Taljen">after a war a Parlztluzan is a good thing to
    institute.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Is it a good thing to keep?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">With the mortality rate at Ta-tjenen?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Glintz does without it.</q> They merely used
    <q>brief conjugal visits</q> but kept permanent parents, and look at the
    difference between Ta-tjenen and Glintz. But without one method or the
    other, Patra-Bannk, pitted against the peculiar biology of these people,
    would surely bring the species to a dead end. How they had evolved into
    such a cul-de-sac without already being extinct was beyond Stringer. Their
    original world must have been very kind.
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen continued, interrupting Stringer’s thoughts. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">And, Stringer, judging from the way you act, I wonder
    if your society should institute it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Perhaps.</q>
  </p>

  <blockquote ab:speaker="Stringer">
    <p>
      <strong>Entry 2:</strong> Now we are at Godrhan, the city where Alhane
      claims to have confirmed his hypothesis. It didn’t take too long to get
      here from Glintz. If I am right, the trip will be easy and we will find
      Pike and Hendig by Bannk’s end. Taljen is learning to fly well.
    </p>

    <p>
      I do not understand that very strange thing she said to me at Glintz,
      that part of her wanted to kill me. But she is good company even if we do
      argue a lot. She seems very vulnerable to both attack and affection. Part
      of me wants to do both, and I can never say which will come out.
    </p>

    <p>
      The sun is rising quickly this Bannk, and I see, as Alhane foretold, it
      will shoot for the zenith. It worries me some, but so far all is well.
    </p>
  </blockquote>

  <blockquote ab:speaker="Taljen">
    <p>
      <strong>Alhane:</strong> Glintz was a strange place. How could anyone
      live like that? And Stringer…he is more Alien than I suspected. We are at
      Godrhan now, and I feel on the verge of running back to Ta-tjenen, but
      something tells me I won’t. The sun is getting high and I want to
      hide. Stringer is cheerful, but he does not know what is to come.
    </p>
  </blockquote>

  <p>
    Godrhan was not right on the coast, and after landing, Stringer and Taljen
    walked into the town unescorted. The first thing Stringer saw, lying level
    with the ground, was a small plaza, like that of Ta-tjenen but half as
    large. On the plaza wall a tall pole, three or four times the height of a
    man, supported on all sides by guy lines, and with a thin wire sticking up
    from the top. Many arms projected radially from the pole with weights
    hanging from their tips: plumb bobs, Stringer thought. A closer inspection
    also revealed levels mounted around the pole. Dirt blew up around it in the
    strong wind, forming a large cloud around the base.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">That’s Alhane’s!</q> Taljen exclaimed when she saw
    it.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Godrhan woman">Did I hear someone mention Alhane?</q> a
    voice called from a nearby house. A woman, shorter than Taljen and heavier
    by more than a hair, jumped out of the doorway and ran up to them. She was
    wearing a sun suit. <q ab:speaker="Godrhan woman">Did you say the name of
    Alhane?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Yes,</q> Taljen answered.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Godrhan woman">Your accent is strange. From Ta-tjenen?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">You are right.</q> Taljen smiled. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">And I know Alhane well.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The fatter woman grinned. <q ab:speaker="Godrhan woman">Then you must come
    out of the sun and talk. Did Alhane arrive safely back in Ta-tjenen?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Quite safe; I am sure he would thank you.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Godrhan woman">And did he prove what he set out to
    prove?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">He thinks he did; others aren’t so sure.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The other woman shook her head. <q ab:speaker="Godrhan woman">That would be
    strange indeed. I’m told by our scientists that, if true, Godrhan would be
    displaced from the Center.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen started and Stringer laughed, doubling over. His cowl, blowing
    because it was untied, wrapped itself around his face, and the three cloths
    tangled there.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">How can Godrhan be the Center if Ta-tjenen is?</q>
    Taljen asked.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Godrhan woman">The reason Godrhan was founded was because
    the founders decided that Ta-tjenen was not the Center after all and that
    the Tjenens were mistaken to think so.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">But Ta-tjenen <em>means</em> <q>The Rising at the
    Center.</q></q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Godrhan woman">Words!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen sighed and the wind whistled. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I am not sure
    who is correct, but someone must be wrong.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer untangled his cowl and interrupted. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">We
    have been traveling a long time without a sleep. Do you have any food you
    could offer us and a place to hide from the sun?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Godrhan woman">Of course,</q> the woman replied. <q ab:speaker="Godrhan woman">Come with me.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer grabbed his rodoft and followed her.
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    Stringer had his eyes riveted on the map viewer as he stood by
    <em>Nothing,</em> waiting to depart. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">The next town
    is far,</q> he said, looking up at Taljen. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">farther
    than we have come already. My map says about four thousand kilometers. And we
    must get there. Are you well rested?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Just as he looked up, Taljen hid something behind her back.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What have you got there?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Nothing for your eyes.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Come on,</q> Stringer said, making a playful dive
    at the piece of paper. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What have we here?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen smiled meekly as she released the paper. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I’m
    scared.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer took the parchment and looked at it. It was a small copy of the
    map from the great meeting tent which had Ta-tjenen in the Center and
    Godrhan at the bottom. The collector of winds was not far, according to the
    map.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer was about to rip up the chart but instead gave it back to
    Taljen. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Look at my map,</q> he said, and Taljen
    did. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">We will see who is right, I think. If you
    die, remember, I am only in the next seat and will join you shortly.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Okay,</q> Taljen said.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer grinned at her simple Bitter. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Okay.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    For the first time this Bannk, Stringer wiped the sweat off his brow. Then
    he put on his cowl, checking his salt and water flasks, and entered the
    sailplane. The first teclad of this Killer Bannk was more than half gone,
    and then still had a long way to go.
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">So, you see,</q> said Stringer when they had flown
    another one thousand kilometers or more, <q ab:speaker="Stringer">your map
    is wrong and we have not been collected with the winds, nor have we fallen
    off the Edge of the World.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen hesitated before speaking. She folded the map on which she had kept
    a watchful eye and placed it in her bag among her few belongings. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">It seems that you may be right, Stringer,</q> she said
    slowly. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">If the world has an edge, it is not
    here. Patra-Bannk looks to be larger than I expected.</q> She wiped a tear
    from her eye. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Are you satisfied?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Me? What good does it do me? Perhaps you now see
    that Ta-tjenen may not be the Center.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Perhaps.</q>
  </p>

  <blockquote ab:speaker="Stringer">
    <p>
      <strong>Entry 14:</strong> The Bannk is totally with us. The sun is
      already higher than it was last Bannk and has turned from friend to
      enemy. It is very hot, hotter than a desert on Two-Bit, but swamped in
      humidity. Clouds are beginning to diffuse the sun and whiten the sky. But
      so far, we have been able to reach each village in one hop from the
      last. What luck! We are losing weight. Food on this planet is not
      plentiful. Shade is not plentiful, either. The pod-tree forest ended long
      ago.
    </p>

    <p>
      Most villages are only specks on my map and hardly have any contact with
      the others. None have any idea that their own planet is round. Sometimes
      I think everybody here is stupid. At least none but Ta-tjenen and Godrhan
      think that their village is the Center.
    </p>

    <p>
      My hands are nothing but calluses from holding the stick for telclads and
      dragging <em>Nothing</em> around after we land. Taljen’s skin is dark and
      leathery this Bannk. She is unrecognizable from last. She is still
      beautiful, but it is a new kind of beauty, a beauty for surviving, not for
      watching. I think if she had looked this way when we first met, I would
      have thought her ugly, half reptile. Maybe my tastes have changed. My own
      skin used to be a dull gray-green; now it is splotched over with brown
      and black. Taljen is better at keeping time than I am, but both of us are
      losing track of how long we have been gone.
    </p>
  </blockquote>

  <blockquote ab:speaker="Taljen">
    <p>
      <strong>Alhane:</strong> Where we are, I don’t know, nor could I conceive
      of how to tell you. I am very confused. Most of the villages we have met
      are but minute specks on Stringer’s map, but, to them, Ta-tjenen is only a
      name, far away. When I try to tell the people of the wonders of their
      parent city, they only shrug. The Parlztluzan is almost an oddity; some
      towns use it and others do not. Nothing is constant.
    </p>

    <p>
      Stringer’s rodoft sees us through. We have nothing to pay our hosts but
      music, and it is gratefully accepted. Stringer is wonderful when he plays
      his rodoft. He said he took it up just for diversion, but you can see
      that he speaks to it as he plays. His playing is not quite as forceful as
      it used to be but is richer and means more to me.
    </p>
  </blockquote>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I think you have a pretty planet,</q> Stringer
    said as he leaned back, tuned his rodoft, and looked out over the misty
    blue ocean.
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen, in front of him, banked the plane and shook her head. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">No Tjenen would ever agree to that, my Alien.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer laughed and plucked a chord. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">That’s
    because you’ve never had a chance to enjoy it. If you could, then you would
    realize it is very pretty and unspoiled compared with mine.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">What is your planet like?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Small, infinitesimally small compared with this
    one. My planet would disappear if it were spread out on this one. And it’s
    mostly people. It’s very crowded, so not one gets too upset if anyone is
    killed in a fight—big or little. There are lots of fights; there are no
    nestrexas. Like Alhane, everyone grows up with a permanent family. Sometimes
    there is a big war or famine and the population goes down a little. Then it
    goes up again, then down again. I think sooner or later something will have
    to give. We colonized a few sister worlds in our solar system but that
    didn’t help much. They’re as crowded as Two-Bit now. Then we built ships
    like the one that brought us here. Everyone is so eager to have them that
    the government spends a lot of time trying to make sure they’re used
    right. But the government is a flop. I’m not sure why the ships were built
    at all, or why there is such a big fuss about them. They’re so expensive
    that only the biggest businesses can afford them. They can’t bring back
    much. They can’t carry many people. The few colonies that they’ve
    established on nearby planets are small. It’s too expensive to bring back
    what little they make and soon, I guess, those worlds will be crowded
    too. Maybe now that we’re discovered Patra-Bannk everyone will come
    here. That will solve the problem.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">There is a lot to it, I see.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Yes, twenty-five hundred Two-Bits’ worth, at
    least. I wish the scenery would change a little though. You’d think we’ve
    gone nowhere instead of more than twelve thousand kilometers, two
    continents’ worth of distance.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">You may have your wish soon. Look ahead.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer did and saw huge mountains rearing in the distance, the same he
    had seen on the northward journey. It was difficult to say how far away
    they were. Guessing on any planet was hazardous; on Patra-Bannk
    impossible.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">And what of you, Stringer?</q> Taljen asked
    suddenly. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">You have told me of your world but have
    never said anything of your own life.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer sighed and paused. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What is a life? I
    don’t know.…Jumbled memories of people and places best left
    forgotten. Jumbled fragments of might-have-beens and whiffs of dreams
    destroyed. There are too many dark corners, occasionally illuminated by a
    stranger who, for a time, becomes a friend, until random events, trapdoors,
    yank you down different corridors of the maze. It is a maze of dead ends
    and broken paths where each event, each turning point, is like the murder
    of an unborn self, until you are finally left with but one path to follow
    and have become what you were never meant to be.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    After a long silence Taljen spoke. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">You’ve never said
    anything like that before.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">It is difficult to always sound like yourself,</q>
    Stringer chuckled. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I wouldn’t hold your breath for
    more. My life is just a life, nothing else.</q>
  </p>

  <blockquote ab:speaker="Stringer">
    <p>
      <strong>Entry 20:</strong> Several beclads ago we landed, and just as we
      did, a control wire for the elevator snapped. I repaired it with the
      extra wire we brought along, but the accident shows us how lucky we are
      to get this far unhurt. Luck has gotten worse since then, and I wonder if
      that small event was the turning point of our journey. At each stop I
      sand down the flakes peeling off the sailplane, reshellac, and peel the
      burned skin off my own face. Taljen is miserable after what happened
      earlier.
    </p>
  </blockquote>

  <blockquote ab:speaker="Taljen">
    <p>
      <strong>Alhane:</strong> I am very unhappy. We just stopped at a small
      village. The villagers saw the solofar coming down and ran out to meet
      us, but they carried weapons and were not very friendly.
    </p>

    <p>
      <q ab:speaker="villager">Why are you here?</q> the big man asked us.
    </p>

    <p>
      <q ab:speaker="Taljen">We must travel south,</q> I told him, although it
      was almost impossible to understand what he said, the accent was so
      strong.
    </p>

    <p>
      I remember what he answered. <q ab:speaker="villager">We have been asked
      to go south, too. Something is up, but I am not sure what it is all
      about. And tell me, where do you come from?</q>
    </p>

    <p>
      <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Ta-tjenen,</q> I answered.
    </p>

    <p>
      <q ab:speaker="villager">I have never heard of it,</q> the man said.
    </p>

    <p>
      I wanted to cry.
    </p>
  </blockquote>

  <nav><a href="twir_22.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown-bottom" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown-bottom&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_24.xhtml">Next »</a></nav></body></html>