<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:ab="http://example.org/audiobook-schema" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>The World is Round, Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="twir.css" />
  <link rel="icon" href="icon.svg" />
</head>
<body><nav><a href="twir_10.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown-top" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown-top&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_12.xhtml">Next »</a></nav><h2><div>Chapter Ten</div>Conjectures and
  Refutations</h2>

  <p>
    Pike and Paddelack searched every nook and cranny of the metallic hydrogen
    storeroom until they were convinced that it was plainly a storeroom and
    nothing else. During the investigation, which Pike guessed took more than a
    day because the room was so huge, Paddelack had found a large cubical
    structure with one face open in which some of the plates were stacked. They
    hoped they might have found an opening underneath that led to a transport
    facility, but finally became convinced that either there was no such
    facility or the opening to it had been tightly sealed off.
  </p>

  <p>
    They gradually widened the search area to places on either side but found
    nothing that they could positively connect with the metallic hydrogen
    supply. Adjoining rooms—the few that were open—evidently contained controls
    of some sort, but just as the layman who enters a giant laboratory can make
    neither head nor tail of the blinking lights, so these control rooms were
    equally unintelligible to Pike and Paddelack. A week’s time passed and then
    another, and the discouragement began to settle in once more.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">We were so close,</q> Pike sighed, sitting down on a
    stack of the plates. <q ab:speaker="Pike">And yet the answer has eluded
    us.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Remember what you’ve got, though,</q> Paddelack
    said. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Also remember that we don’t have any idea
    where the factory might be. We’re assuming it is in or near this city. It
    might not even be on this planet.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike rolled his eyes. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Don’t say that. Searching this
    city is proving impossible enough, walking forever down vacant streets and
    alleys. Can you imagine searching the entire planet? Or the Universe? I
    don’t even want to think about it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Do you think answers are easy to find? You’re the
    one who’s always talking about patience.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike left Paddelack and walked to a nearby building to continue the search
    there. Within an hour, or what Paddelack would have called about two
    telclads, Pike had found a staircase near the main entrance of the new
    building. He looked down at the wide treads and decided they were
    negotiable. Then he went to get Paddelack.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Well?</q> he asked, questioning Paddelack with his
    eyes as they both looked down.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">If you have a gateway—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Let’s go.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    They descended the spiral on uncomfortably large treads for a very long
    time. They tried counting the number of steps but eventually lost
    track. Pike tried to guess the size of the builders by the depth of the
    treads, but he realized that if he had done that with stairs on Two-Bit, he
    would have ranged those builders from midgets to giants, with all sizes in
    between.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">I hope we manage to find a better way up, or I
    don’t think I will make it,</q> groaned Paddelack.
  </p>

  <p>
    Eventually the staircase ended. Paddelack craned his neck, looking back up
    the way they had come. There was no way to tell if they had descended five
    hundred meters or a thousand or even more; the far end of the staircase
    converged to a blur.
  </p>

  <p>
    They walked through a short corridor that joined a larger causeway. Several
    grooved tracks ran down the center of the floor. Paddelack knelt and ran
    his finger over the nearest one. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">I think this is
    more metallic hydrogen. Frictionless rails, maybe? Do you think the
    builders would stoop to anything so simple?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack did not notice the gap until he rose to his feet. His eyes
    followed the nearby wall to waist height and then up to nothing at all. He
    rushed over to the causeway’s edge and tried to put his hand over the top
    of the wall. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Ouch,</q> he grumbled as his hand
    met something invisible and unyielding. The material was very transparent,
    more transparent than glass, almost invisible.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">It might be quartz,</q> Pike said, trying to scratch
    it with his knife.
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack was not listening but stood with his bird-beaked nose pressed
    hard against the surface for many moments. He could barely see something
    above him, perhaps the ceiling. It extended in all directions for the
    little distance he could see in the causeway light. From the other side of
    the causeway he sensed some vague shapes and the ceiling above him extended
    outward again.
  </p>

  <p>
    He left the window, pulling on his nose, and then slowly faced Pike with
    glazed eyes. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">God, it is. Just as we guessed. For
    twenty years I wondered, and it’s true. This planet is a hollow shell and
    we’re on the inside.</q> He pointed upward. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">That’s the inner surface right above our heads.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike squeezed his eyes shut and shook his head in disbelief. After a long
    pause he said, <q ab:speaker="Pike">That certainly would explain the low
    density.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">I hope that doesn’t make the planet too
    light. That shell would have to be mighty heavy to produce the gravity we
    see.</q> Then Paddelack snapped his fingers and clicked his tongue. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">No, I’m wrong. Sorry.</q> He sighed in relief. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">We’re not on the inside of a hollow sphere.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">It sounded like a good idea—I guess. What’s wrong with
    it?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">We’d be weightless, neglecting, of course, the
    small gravity produced by this causeway beneath us.</q> Paddelack could see
    by the shake of Pike’s head that he didn’t understand. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">If you are on the inside of a sphere, inside the
    hollow, gravity cancels out and you’re left weightless. And that’s true
    anywhere on the inside.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">How can gravity cancel out?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Let’s see if I remember how it works: if we are
    close to one section of the wall, that section pulls us toward it with a
    much greater force than the far section of the wall pulls us in the
    opposite direction.</q> Pike nodded. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">But in a
    sphere, the far section is then much bigger than the near section, so it
    attracts you more because it is bigger and has more mass to it. The two
    effects cancel out on the inside of a sphere, and we’re left
    weightless.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">But clearly we’re not,</q> Pike concluded, taking his
    sigh of relief.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Clearly. That’s one theory shot, by
    Sarek—Verlaxchi, for that matter.</q> Paddelack turned again to the
    blackness. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">But I do want to go out there.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">All right, but first let’s see what else is here. I
    don’t want to make too many trips up that stairway.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The two men continued down the causeway, walking slowly as if they were
    afraid someone would jump out at them. They hadn’t gone far before Pike
    spied an object lying outside the window. He quickened his pace until it
    was almost a run, and then he abruptly stopped. On his right, connected to
    the causeway by a passage, was a ship. It wasn’t like any ship Pike had
    ever seen, but there were enough similarities to his previous experiences
    to convince him it was a ship. It had no wings and wasn’t streamlined, but
    it had openings for engines and windows to see through. It was a ship. Then
    the Gostum claim of rockets at Triesk rang in his head.
  </p>

  <p>
    Another ship could be seen beyond the first, and more beyond. Pike followed
    along the line, first slowly and then faster, until he was running. Each
    was different, all very different. They were small. They might be shuttles,
    but to where? Suddenly Pike realized that Paddelack was no longer with
    him. He stopped and turned around. Paddelack was a hundred meters behind,
    motionless, peering out into the gloom.
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike ran back and joined his companion. Paddelack was shaking his head
    confusedly. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Is it?</q> he asked hurriedly, still
    out of breath from the run. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Please tell me
    no.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike joined him at the observation window and clenched his jaw. His reply
    was at first hesitant. <q ab:speaker="Pike">I’m not sure. It does
    look…similar.</q> After a long pause he spoke again, sounding overly
    convinced. <q ab:speaker="Pike">No, it is only similar. Not the same, I
    tell you.</q> His response was so firmly negative because it was the only
    answer that admitted sanity. He pressed his face closer to the pane, which
    only became visible under his breath. The ship sitting in the spindly
    berth, only dimly lit by the causeway light, was distressingly similar to
    their own shuttlecraft.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">I want to go inside,</q> Paddelack announced
    suddenly.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">And, I ask you, how?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">What about this?</q> Paddelack replied as he
    traced his finger around what was clearly a door in the causeway that led
    to a gangplank on the other side. His hand stopped at what appeared to be a
    latch set into the surface.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">No, don’t,</q> Pike said, grasping Paddelack’s
    hand. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Let’s get some suits first. We don’t know what,
    if anything, is inside.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Of course. Give me some credit, will you? Now
    let’s find our way back up.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    As they walked back down the concourse, Paddelack noticed, in some small
    part of his mind, that the gangway doors were of different sizes and the
    latches varied widely in construction, but the thought never verbalized
    itself, and he soon forgot about it altogether.
  </p>

  <p>
    They got back to the stairwell and Pike was about to start up
    again. However, after a few moments’ search they discovered an elevator
    near the stairs. When the door opened, both men jumped back in fright.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike"><em>Sarek!</em></q> Pike shouted. <q ab:speaker="Pike">If you abandoned a city, would you leave it in working
    order for any vagabond who happened to stumble by?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Do you include yourself in that category?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Of course not.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Then remember about webbed feet and eagles and
    let’s go.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    When they reached <em>Number Two</em>, Barbalan was not there. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Where do you think she is?</q> Paddelack asked as he
    checked the rear compartments.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">It’s a big planet. Maybe she went for a walk. She’ll
    turn up.</q> Pike took two suits out of storage and handed one to
    Paddelack. <q ab:speaker="Pike">I doubt that she has gone far. It’s clear
    that there is no place to go, right?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack hesitantly took one of the suits, and then returned to the city
    and descended into the interior of the planet.
  </p>

  <p>
    The latch on the door responded easily to Paddelack’s twist. When he looked
    at the gauge on his chest, it became apparent that the only thing in the
    gangway was air. Stale air at that, Paddelack decided while taking off his
    helmet and sniffing around him. The shuttle hatch opened just as easily and
    a cabin light went on. Both men sighed audibly. The console was arranged
    differently, the displays were of an unfamiliar design, although the
    overall arrangement was similar to that of <em>Number Two</em>. But it was
    not a replica—not quite.
  </p>

  <p>
    They looked around for a few moments until Pike found a hatch that surely
    led outside. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Well?</q> he said with an added cock of
    an eyebrow.
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack answered by putting on his helmet. Pike followed suit and they
    opened the door. They were in an air lock. They opened the outer door and
    the air whooshed out around them. Paddelack watched the needle of the
    vacuum gauge on his chest swing as close to zero as it could get and stay
    there pinned. Somehow, although he was not sure why, he had expected this.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">It’s high vacuum out there,</q> he remarked. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">This gauge goes down to about ten-to-the-minus-seven
    millimeters, and I’ll bet it’s lower out there. I wonder how much
    lower.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike shrugged. <q ab:speaker="Pike">I wouldn’t know.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack raised the lantern he had brought with him and saw that
    all-embracing ceiling and the supports for the rocket berths. He pointed
    the lamp downward and saw nothing. But it was downward. If they had been in
    a hollow sphere, there would not have been any preferred direction, no up,
    down, or sideways. Yet here was an up and a down. Down was at his feet; up
    was at his head. Paddelack was stymied.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">So,</q> said Pike, interrupting his thoughts, <q ab:speaker="Pike">where does that get us?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Absolutely nowhere.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    They returned to the surface in silence and headed back to <em>Number
    Two</em>. Barbalan was missing still, but both men knew she could take care
    of herself and decided not to search immediately, not having any idea of
    where to look. Paddelack sat down at the ship’s computer and after a few
    minutes shook his head. Pike peered over his shoulder at the sketches he
    had drawn.
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack laughed. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">I thought that if this planet
    was made out of metallic hydrogen, I’d figure out the thickness of a shell
    needed to produce the observed gravity. I don’t know the density of
    metallic hydrogen, so I took a guess at magnesium and used that instead. I
    thought that would give me a ballpark estimate—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">And—?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">If we are willing to believe that this planet is
    a shell of the order of ten thousand kilometers thick, then it might
    work. I don’t believe it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">And how does that explain the vacuum a kilometer
    down?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">It doesn’t, of course, unless the rocket hangar
    is some kind of pocket in the shell. That theory sounds almost
    plausible. But the theorizing gets fancier with every additional assumption
    and less tasty, too. Planet’s not a shell of metallic hydrogen, I’ll say
    that with Bitter Certainty.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">You will? Give yourself credit, Paddy. If what you
    tell me about gravity canceling out inside spheres is true, then it seems
    to me we really have no evidence that we went beneath the shell at all. In
    fact, my good Paddelack, we may have barely scratched the surface, so we’d
    still feel gravity. Thus, it seems to me that your original thick-shell
    hypothesis is a good one—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Except for the vacuum.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Easier to explain than gravity, wouldn’t you say?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">You can have it your way. I refuse to believe
    that anyone could build a shell of metallic hydrogen ten thousand
    kilometers thick. I’m absolutely positive. I’d rather believe Patra-Bannk
    is natural. Theorists these days are so slippery they can figure out a way
    for anything to happen. The rule to follow is: if it is not expressly
    forbidden, then it’s compulsory. A rather totalitarian way of looking at
    things, but it always works; half the major discoveries of the last three
    hundred years were predicted by the use of that principle.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Well,</q> Pike concluded with a sigh as he picked up
    the crumpled ball of paper and tossed it in his hands, <q ab:speaker="Pike">we have more important things to occupy us, like a
    manufacturing facility to find.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">And a missing girl. Which do we attend to
    first?</q>
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    The search for both Barbalan and the manufacturing facility went on for
    more weeks. Paddelack had no idea of where to look for the girl. If she was
    outside the city, finding a needle in a haystack would have been easy work
    compared with the odds of locating her. If she had managed to get in,
    despite the Fear, the odds were several orders of magnitude better, but
    still infinitesimal. And did she have food? If not, she would surely be
    dead already. Paddelack grew despondent, and his frame of mind began to
    infect Pike.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">What do you want me to do?</q> Pike cried. <q ab:speaker="Pike">All we can hope to do is run into her somewhere along the
    line.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack trudged up the ramp. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Why don’t we
    forget the facility and try to find her? Even if we locate what we are
    looking for, chances are we won’t even know it. All we’ve seen are
    buildings enclosed in this giant tent, empty rooms, amphitheaters,
    who-knows-what-else built by who-knows-what. About all we can tell is
    nothing.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike let him run on. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Do you want to leave? What chance
    of finding her then?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack sighed and kept walking up the ramp. Pike followed, and as the
    ramp emptied onto a large circular area, he scratched the back of his
    neck. Why they hadn’t come this way before, he couldn’t understand. After
    all, it was a perfectly obvious place to come. The room was centrally
    placed, right beneath the translucent dome that capped the city at its
    center. You would have thought it would be the first place to look. But
    though they hadn’t come before, they were here now. As always, the lights
    were on when they entered. Pike could never quite catch them going on or
    off, but he felt that was what they were doing. It made him feel
    uncomfortable, as if he were being watched.
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike noticed that several other ramps from different directions emptied
    onto the platform as well. The room was big, and the translucent dome above
    made it look even bigger. In the center stood a cylinder that itself must
    have been ten meters across. Thick shiny posts around the circumference
    supported the cylinder, so that you could walk under and inside
    it. Paddelack did so and Pike followed.
  </p>

  <p>
    The inner surface lit up immediately to reveal a huge, three hundred
    sixty-degree map of a planet. The top of the map was high above their
    heads but cleverly constructed so that the upper latitudes were not
    distorted and could be seen as clearly as the lower parts.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Patra-Bannk?</q> asked Pike.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Of course, it must be.</q> But Paddelack’s <q>of
    course</q> took a few minutes to manifest itself as they searched for
    something familiar. They failed.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">And what about those lines?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The lines. They were, indeed, curious. A network of hair-thin lines
    crisscrossed the map, each line terminating at a clearly marked
    point. Thousands of such lines, perhaps even tens of thousands, spanned the
    huge world.
  </p>

  <p>
    Finally, Paddelack found Konndjlan, or rather the Massarat range, almost
    unnoticed on a small continent—a continent that might have been ten times
    the size of all of Two-Bit. His eyes passed across the ocean to rest on
    what must have been Daryephna. A few dozen lines radiated from its point on
    the map. Most of those lines traveled either east or southwest across the
    ocean to link up with other dots.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Look at that spot up there!</q> Paddelack
    pointed.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">I’ve noticed that,</q> Pike replied. <q ab:speaker="Pike">There must be five dozen lines from that one. Hmm, that
    one ends up where you say Massarat should be.</q> Pike pointed to the
    magnified spot high above his head.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Ah.</q> Paddelack scowled. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">It could be anywhere. Scale is too big. Do you think
    it could be a communications network of some kind?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Between what?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">You do have a point there. Where do you suppose
    that major intersection is?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The question was asked innocently, almost rhetorically, but something
    clicked for Pike. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Of course! It’s Triesk! I’m sure of
    it. It’s just where Triesk is on the Polkraitz map. It must be.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">But the scale,</q> Paddelack shot back, shaking
    his head. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">I’m telling you, you could be off by a
    thousand kilometers at least.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">No. Look at the distance between Massarat and that
    point. It’s perceivable, about thirty centimeters, would you say? If
    Massarat and Triesk are a hundred thousand kilometers apart, that must be
    it. Besides, look at the curve on the coast, the latitude compared with
    Daryephna, the mountain range ending somewhat south of it. We can check the
    other map, but I’m sure.…Could the Gostum have had something?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">What do you mean?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Have the people of Triesk found something that might
    explain all this? We found rockets here; there might also be rockets at
    Triesk. We have to go and find out. Do we have all the hydrogen loaded
    aboard the <em>Crimson</em> that we can carry?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Yes, I think so.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Good, let’s go to Triesk.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">What about Barbalan?</q> Paddelack added, his
    small eyes flitting from the map to his feet. Part of his mind thought that
    Pike’s mental equations between Daryephna and Triesk, Gostum and rockets,
    were total lunacy, the same type of brilliant gyrations that allowed him to
    equate <q>almost-plausibles</q> in other people’s actions with certainties
    and were responsible for his frequent, sometimes hysterical, accusations
    about their behavior. But part of his mind knew that Pike and his ability
    to equate unrelateds might achieve something, and he could feel the
    excitement rising. And part of him felt responsible for the safety of
    others.
  </p>

  <p>
    The sound of feet being dragged across the floor resolved the dilemma.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike and Paddelack">Barbalan!</q> both men shouted as
    one. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">How did you get in here?</q> Paddelack ran
    over to give her support, but she was not about to fall over.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Where have you been?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Did you have food?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Barbalan looked only slightly more slender than her usual slender self. She
    opened her mouth and was about to speak when she took notice of the map
    surrounding her. Her hand found it way into her sporran and she fingered the
    Fairtalian necklace. Then she shook her head to clear it and suddenly
    sprang to life.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">You must come with me,</q> she urged, pulling
    Paddelack by the arm. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">It is important; you must
    come!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack glanced toward Pike helplessly and let himself be dragged. The
    three of them ran down the ramp to the main level and then down
    another. Following a long, confusing route, Barbalan led them into a
    low-lying building that was overshadowed by the overhang of
    another. Inside, Paddelack barely had time to examine his surroundings when
    Barbalan tried to force him into a kind of chair. He resisted, grabbing
    her arm.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">What is the problem?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Please, it is important.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">What are you doing? What is going to happen
    here?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike interrupted. <q ab:speaker="Pike">I’ll sit down. Nothing has happened
    to us yet; why should anything happen to us now?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike sat down on the chair, which seemed to mold itself to his
    body. Suddenly he stiffened, shouted, and put his hands tightly to his
    temples. In a moment he had fallen to the floor and Paddelack had pulled
    him up. The Fear? Had it finally materialized in this room? Paddelack
    didn’t wait to find out but dragged his companion from the room and the
    building and into the street. He looked at Barbalan suspiciously.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">But…but you must understand. I don’t…</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack ignored her, and when Pike had recovered sufficiently, the two
    hurried out of the city. Barbalan ran after them, pleading with them to
    return. Neither Pike nor Paddelack would turn back now. As they exited
    Daryephna, Paddelack could feel the relatively cool air whistle around
    them. The sun was very low, flat gray clouds streaked the sky. It was
    raining over the city and snow was on its way. It would not be long now.
  </p>

  <p>
    When Pike looked well enough to speak, Paddelack questioned him. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">What happened?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">I don’t know. It was like a sledgehammer,
    though. <em>Wham</em>, and I was out.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Are you all right now?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">I think so. But I also think that it is high time to
    go to Triesk before we get into any more trouble with the city’s
    defenses.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack nodded, then took another look at the sun. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Oh no, I just remembered something. We’re too
    late.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">What do you mean, my good friend? Explain
    yourself.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">It was stupid to forget, but it is also
    understandable. I guess we forgot because we’ve been here for so long
    now. On Two-Bit you fly across the ocean and the time changes several
    hours. We flew across the ocean and time changed back more than half a
    teclad. I’d guess we’re about twenty Two-Bit days behind Triesk. Over
    there, the Patra has already begun, as it will here shortly.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">What a stupid mistake! We waited too long.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">We can’t stay here too much longer, either, even
    if we wanted to. We’re running out of food. I suppose we could head back to
    the big ship.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike screwed up his lips and thought. <q ab:speaker="Pike">We have to
    refuel at the <em>Crimson</em>, anyway, sooner or later. But I suggest that
    for the Patra we go to Konndjlan.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack"><em>What!</em></q> Paddelack shrieked. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Are you gone completely?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">No, listen. We don’t know what is going to happen to
    us if we stay here, on several counts. We may freeze to death, or whatever
    it was that got me may decide to get us again. We have failed to find the
    manufacturing facility, besides, and the next step is, obviously, to go to
    Triesk. But we can’t go now, because I gather they are already Under for
    the Patra, or Going Under. So we have to wait for the Bannk. The Gostum
    wanted us, so let them have us, and we can be comfortable.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack just stared, wide-eyed, then threw his spindly arms into the air
    and walked away.
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike climbed into the shuttle. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Barbalan,</q> he said,
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">we’re going to Konndjlan.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    She didn’t understand him, of course.
  </p>

  <nav><a href="twir_10.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown-bottom" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown-bottom&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_12.xhtml">Next »</a></nav></body></html>