<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:ab="http://example.org/audiobook-schema" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>The World is Round, Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="twir.css" />
  <link rel="icon" href="icon.svg" />
</head>
<body><nav><a href="twir_17.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_19.xhtml">Next »</a></nav><h2><div>Chapter Seventeen</div>Fire or Stars;
  Personalities vs. Universes</h2>

  <p>
    Pike awoke coughing and wheezing in a smoke-filled room. He quickly ran
    over to Paddelack’s bed.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Get up! Paddelack, get up!</q> Paddelack stirred
    slowly at first, rubbed his eyes, and then jumped up as Pike had. He
    quickly put on some shoes while Pike knelt to awaken the girl who had been
    sleeping beside him. They threw on their robes as fast as possible and
    bolted from the room.
  </p>

  <p>
    Gostum were already running by in neat, orderly files. <q ab:speaker="young     Fairtalian">Commander, come this way!</q> Pike was pulled through corridors
    thick with smoke. His eyes were stinging, and he was coughing so much that
    he thought he would rip out his lungs. The girl collapsed beside him and he
    halted. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Take her!</q> he ordered, and she was carried
    away.
  </p>

  <p>
    Abruptly, he was shoved into a rock-walled chamber and heavy blankets were
    thrust into his hands, as well as a heavy parka. <q ab:speaker="young     Fairtalian">Hopefully you will be safe here, Commander,</q> said the young
    Fairtalian as he disappeared and shut the door behind him. Just then a
    blast of cold air hit Pike’s face. He looked about him: the room was
    crowded with people huddling together. He saw the glare of a fire that must
    have been burning around the corner and rushed over to it. Three fires
    occupied a ledge of windows that undoubtedly led almost directly to the
    outside world. Pike stood there for many moments, turning frantically this
    way and that. The walls began to close in on him. The fires on the ledge
    began to envelop the entire room in flames. He would throw himself on the
    logs and immolate himself. But no. Pike was keenly aware of the quiet
    discipline of the Gostum, the iron-willing discipline that characterized
    their every action. He hadn’t shouted, had he? That was not a good thing to
    do, not here. Absolutely not. Pike took a deep breath, walked calmly to the
    door, and left the chamber.
  </p>

  <p>
    The corridors were still thick with smoke and cold with the little fresh
    air that was being allowed in. Pike was sure that Konndjlan would soon die,
    but now was as good a time as any. He put his robe in front of his mouth
    and continued walking. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Karrxlyn, is that you?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The giant rushed over to him. <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">Commander, you
    should be in the emergency chamber.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike ignored him. <q ab:speaker="Pike">What is wrong?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">One of the exhaust shafts in the furnace room
    broke. Several of them, perhaps. It was an unforgivable mistake and we will
    all pay dearly for it. We are already letting in too much fresh air. You
    see, my feet are already numb. We do not have quazzats enough for more than
    a handful, so no one can go out. But I must go down again and see what can
    be done.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">You may die.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">One may always die. That is what life is all
    about.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">I’m coming with you.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">But, Commander—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Does a Commander huddle with the children? As you say,
    one may always die. That is how Gostum survive, isn’t it? That is how we
    survive.</q> They went below.
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike doused himself with water on the way down and coughed through wet
    cloth. When he entered the furnace room, he could see the flames shooting
    out from the furnace itself. The stockpile of wood had caught on fire and
    the whole room seemed aflame. The exhaust shafts, which normally took the
    deadly fumes to the surface, were themselves on fire and now useless. One
    of the hollow wooden pipes had collapsed and Pike could see the body of an
    unfortunate Gostum beneath it. Well, he would have paid with his life,
    anyway.…
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Use the drinking water!</q> Pike shouted as he began
    dragging the nearest of the kindling from the room.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">But that is reserved!</q> Karrxlyn shouted back.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">There is nothing else! We’ll melt snow and get
    more. Use it!</q> Pike coughed and left the room only long enough to get a
    drink and a bit more oxygen. Buckets were being brought now, but that
    method clearly was useless. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Karrxlyn! Can you block
    all the ventilators and exhaust ducts to this room? All of them?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">How will we breathe?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">We’re not breathing now. Can you do it? Fires can’t
    burn without air. Cut it off!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">I will see what can be done.</q> Karrxlyn shook
    his head. The ventilators all passed close to the furnaces to heat the
    incoming air, and the fresh air for Konndjlan came through this room and
    the few others like it. But with the ventilators in flames the air was no
    longer fresh. Perhaps from the floor above they could be blocked. He
    grabbed three of the nearest men with axes and disappeared.
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike removed as much of the fuel store and burning logs as he could and
    sealed the furnace-room door shut behind him, shoving his cape
    underneath. Karrxlyn returned shortly.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">We have done what you commanded. All the incoming
    shafts are blocked from above, and water is being poured down them as
    well.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Good.</q> Pike coughed heavily and ran upstairs. Now
    they would wait. Upstairs, the air was getting colder from the fresh,
    unheated air being admitted simply to keep the Gostum alive. Pike found a
    draft, huddled in his robes, and leaned against the wall. He grabbed the
    familiar gaunt figure as it walked by aimlessly. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Paddelack,</q> he said, <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">you once mentioned that you saw a steam engine in
    the shop downstairs.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack rubbed his bird-beaked nose and his eyes, then nodded.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Do you think you can do something with it? Convert it
    into a heating system? Something?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">I’ll see what I can do,</q> Paddelack wheezed.
  </p>

  <p>
    After an hour or so, Pike heard from Karrxlyn that fifty had died from
    smoke poisoning. All around him, Pike could see people sick from near
    asphyxiation or exposure to cold air. The sound of coughing and sneezing,
    usually incidental to Pike, now became utterly unbearable to him. He knew
    that it would go on for weeks. The air would remain foul, hardly
    breathable. The rugs and furniture would smell of smoke. Konndjlan would be
    barely habitable. More people would die from the aftereffects of that one
    mistake. It wasn’t over. But Pike no longer had any doubt in his mind about
    why the Gostum wanted to leave Patra-Bannk.
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    Not long after the fire, as Paddelack was on his way to test his first
    improved steam engine, he found Effrulyn coughing through the
    halls. Activity had returned to normal, and only the tang in the air and
    the unusual cold remained as annoyances.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Where are you going so fast?</q> Paddelack asked,
    catching Effrulyn by the arm.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">To work,</q> he answered, spinning around and
    jerking away.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Nowhere else? Nothing more important to do?</q>
    Paddelack said that just to annoy the mathematician and was glad to see
    that it had the desired effect.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">What could be more important?</q> Effrulyn
    replied, raising his voice and an eyebrow.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">What I wanted to ask you: what do you know about
    the stala?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">No more or less than anyone else.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Ever use it?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">Of course not. Why should I bother with such a
    waste of time? But I have heard stories about it. Well do I remember one
    event.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">What was that?</q> Paddelack pressed, sitting
    down in the nearest archway.
  </p>

  <p>
    Effrulyn looked off nostalgically into the distance and raised an arm. <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">There I was, sitting peacefully in thought, in the
    great hall where that monstrous clock of my own devising now stands. This
    was well before the time of the clock, you understand—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">I understand.</q> Paddelack nodded.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">In comes running a guard who had just come from an
    Elsewhere, evidently a new Elsewhere, and ridden up from the
    stala. <q>Fara-Ny, call the astronomers,</q> he ordered—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Hold it. Tell me about the astronomers. Didn’t
    think there were any around here.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">Madmen all. I’m not exactly sure when the first
    star was discovered, but it must have been a long time ago, probably during
    an emergency when someone was forced to go outside. From what I am told,
    the stars were a rage that first Patra and everybody went out—if only for a
    few clads—just to see what they looked like. Some started observation, but
    the next Patra nothing was the same. Almost all new stars. Why they
    expected them to be the same, only a metaphysician could tell you. So the
    astronomers got scared. Not only that, but several died from freezing. By
    this time they had decided that stars would only get them killed, and the
    fools had enough sense to get out of the cold. So astronomy has only had
    intermittent followers. Always they reach the conclusion that stars aren’t
    good for anything—I could have told them that—and give up after a few
    teclads.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">So what do they do?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">Mostly they are old men, too old to fight or to
    think, who sit around and make mindless speculations. They once asked me to
    join them, and I said I don’t frame hypotheses. Anyway, where was I?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">The stala.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn" class="no-close-quote">Ah, yes. The guard, who had
    so rudely disturbed the silence, explained agitatedly that when he and his
    party emerged at the Elsewhere, they had immediately noticed that the sun
    had moved. It was in the wrong place.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn" class="no-close-quote">The astronomers went into a
    great debate about this. I suspect that the problem had often been debated
    before. The Ex-tal school, the oldest of the old men, had long been
    convinced that the Elsewheres were not on Patra-Bannk at all, and this
    discovery went to prove it for them. The Al-tal school decided that the sun
    had moved of its own free will, but they were contradicted by the In-tal
    school, who had always claimed that the sun was just condensed vapor and
    couldn’t do what it pleased. The In-tals wanted to know why, if the sun had
    moved at an Elsewhere, it hadn’t moved here. This was heresy to the
    Al-tals, who answered that the sun had moved where it wanted simply
    because, at an Elsewhere, the sun could do whatever it pleased. Then the
    Ex-tal school jumped up again, saying that, of course, the answer was that
    the Elsewhere was completely off Patra-Bannk and that the sun was being
    viewed from a forbidden position and that travels to the Elsewheres must
    cease immediately. Then one of the In-tals had the temerity to suggest that
    maybe it wasn’t even the sun that was being observed, but a duplicate
    traveling on the other side of heaven. This he conjectured as a compromise
    to the Ex-tals, who insisted that the Elsewheres were elsewhere. But the
    rest of the In-tals wouldn’t have anything to do with this doctrine. The
    argument went on mindlessly for a long time.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn" class="no-close-quote">At the end, even though I
    was very young, someone asked me what I thought. I asked the guard whether
    he had gone north or south or east or west, but naturally the fool could
    only say elsewhere. <q>Which way was the sun displaced?</q> I asked
    him. <q>To the east,</q> he replied. Well, the answer was then clear to
    me. I said the world was bent in the east-west direction.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">You should have seen the uproar!</q> Effrulyn
    laughed heartily. <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn"><q>That is a dangerous thing to
    say,</q> one of them told me. <q>You idiots!</q> I said to them. <q>What do
    I care whether the world is flat or bent? That’s for you quibblers to worry
    about. Does it make any difference to your lives? Of course it doesn’t. It
    makes no difference whatsoever. You’re just obscurantists, that’s all. I
    say the world is shaped like a doughnut.</q> They didn’t understand the
    joke, of course, and I have been censured ever since.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    At first Paddelack was amused by the intensity of the diatribe, but then he
    began to realize that, perhaps, Effrulyn not only didn’t care about the
    shape of the world but also didn’t know. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">What do
    you believe?</q> Paddelack asked seriously.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">Believe? I don’t even think about it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Why not?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">Don’t you understand?</q> Effrulyn scowled. <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">It becomes clearer to me all the time that reality is
    simply what people want to believe is real. No more, no less. Therefore, I
    content myself with obviously unreal things in order not to fall prey to
    those illusions that seem to occupy everyone else around here.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Hmm,</q> Paddelack murmured. He conceded that
    Effrulyn might have a point; certainly some people he knew seemed to create
    their own realities. But he still wanted to know something more about the
    stala, and suddenly it occurred to him that however the thing operated, it
    took people far enough so that a displacement of the sun was noticeable,
    even obvious. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Do you have idea how far the stala
    goes?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">For all I know, it goes nowhere and these people
    are deluding themselves.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Do you have any idea how big this planet is?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">At least as far as the horizon, if I’m to be
    forced into metaphysical speculations.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">And how far is that?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">Too far to walk. As far away as the sun.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">What do you mean?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Effrulyn’s wild gesticulations showed that he was on the verge of
    leaving. <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">What do you think I mean? The sun sinks
    at the horizon, so that’s how far away it is.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Seems to me,</q> Paddelack said as he creaked up
    from his sitting position, <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">that if the world’s
    bent, it might be bigger than that.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Effrulyn">All illusions!</q> Effrulyn cried, and both he and
    Paddelack walked away in opposite directions.
  </p>

  <nav><a href="twir_17.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_19.xhtml">Next »</a></nav></body></html>