<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:ab="http://example.org/audiobook-schema" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>The World is Round, Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="twir.css" />
  <link rel="icon" href="icon.svg" />
</head>
<body><nav><a href="twir_12.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_14.xhtml">Next »</a></nav><h2><div>Chapter Twelve</div>And Back Again</h2>

  <p>
    The plain was dark, not a hair away from pitch-black. The giant shadow of
    the Massarat range had plunged the Great Desert into essential night. Only
    the sky directly above held any hint of quickly fading gray.
  </p>

  <p>
    <em>Number Two</em> sat stolidly at the base of the mountain, the gleaming
    of its hull quenched, its thirty meters made infinitesimal next to the
    twenty-kilometer-high peak. The plain was lightly covered with snow,
    representing what little moisture the air on that side of the mountain had
    managed to sneak over some of the lower peaks. The wind whipped it into
    snarls, curled and tightened it around the jagged rocks that littered the
    plain. Sand, too, was lifted by the wind and hurled against the shuttle
    with the snow. Pike listened, hypnotized, to the incessant assault on the
    hull. He would alternately nod off to sleep, lulled into drowsiness by the
    level <em>rat-a-tat-tat</em>, only to be awakened abruptly by a sudden gust
    of wind escalating the fierce clash of quartz and silicon against tarnished
    metal.
  </p>

  <p>
    He finally stood and switched on the front beam, pointing it up the
    slope. The light was lost on the rocks. It could have been ten meters or a
    hundred, even a thousand, and he wouldn’t have been able to tell how far he
    was seeing.
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack paced the cabin in such agitation that one might have thought it
    feigned. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">I don’t understand you,</q> he said, as
    he had said many times before. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">First you risk our
    necks getting us out of Konndjlan, then we almost get killed trying to land
    in that incredible wind, and now you want to have us surely done in by
    climbing back onto that fortress. If we don’t freeze on the mountain or
    blow off in this hurricane—the most likely thing that will happen—the
    Gostum will certainly have our heads once we find a way in.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">No. If I am correct, they want us more than that.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">If you are correct? Have you forgotten that they
    did their best to kill us when we tried to get out the first time?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Are you sure? Were they trying to kill us, or just
    keep us at Konndjlan?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack spun around. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Those wounds were
    certainly real!</q> he shouted, waving his arms. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">And what about Barbalan? Do you know what they will
    do to her? Do you have any idea?</q> He was standing without a shirt on,
    and his ribs looked as if they were doing their best to break through his
    skin.
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike sat down again in the chair, letting his chest collapse in long
    exhalations. <q ab:speaker="Pike">I will take responsibility for
    Barbalan—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Empty promises! What good is responsibility if
    they kill her? What good is your fancy responsibility then?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">If they want us as much as I think they do, they will
    forgive Barbalan. In fact, I will make that a condition for our help.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Let me find out how she feels about this,</q>
    Paddelack said as he turned to Barbalan, who sat on the floor plaiting her
    long, shiny black hair. Her slender fingers ran through it unhindered,
    skillfully weaving and twining the strands. When she had braided up fully
    half her hair, she would just as dexterously untie it and begin again. She
    had said little since they left Daryephna, even less than usual, and when
    questioned about the strange room she had found and what Paddelack had
    taken to be the source of the Fear itself, she would—or could—say nothing.
  </p>

  <p>
    Now, when questioned about her probably fate, she shrugged. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">He may be right. If he isn’t, I will certainly die,
    but then I have little choice, do I? So what matters it?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">They why did you help us?</q> Pike asked after her
    words had been translated. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Because of Paddelack?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack asked her. Barbalan did not stop unbraiding her hair. Indeed, it
    seemed as if that were her primary concern, not answering questions put to
    her. She did smile, faintly, to herself. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Amusement. Boredom, perhaps. What is one to do as a
    Gostum other than train to fight unseen enemies? Why not put the training
    to use? What difference does it make? I got you out, now you go back.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike grinned. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Well, I think it is time we got ready to
    climb. Rope, lights, tents, parkas…they’re all in those storage cabinets. I
    am prepared.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">That’s mighty fine. It’s been cooling off here in
    the shade; night comes quickly over a desert, and I suspect it is fairly
    negative by now. Let’s hope we can stand up in the wind.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Let’s hope.</q>
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    For every meter they rose vertically, Pike estimated that they must have
    walked at least three times that horizontally, which made Konndjlan farther
    away than straight up. Barbalan had assured them that they were indeed on
    the path to Konndjlan, that she had recognized the narrow path that cut up
    the mountain. How she could be so sure, with the only evidence being some
    rocks under a lantern beam pointing the way, Pike did not know. How they
    had managed to find the right mountain in the fading light, Pike was not so
    sure, either. He <em>was</em> sure that they had been walking for
    hours. That was about the only thing of which he was certain, except that
    gravity was acting against them and that it was dark above and dark
    below. The wind was impossible, shrieking in their ears, making every step
    a dangerous one. The snow, whipped by the wind, was blinding. Pike was
    beginning to take for granted the frequent slips of feet on ice, and the
    aches in his bruised legs were no longer novel causes for complaint.
  </p>

  <p>
    Finally, hours after they had begun the climb, Pike collapsed. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Enough for tonight,</q> he shouted to Paddelack, tugging
    at the rope that attached him to his companions. <q ab:speaker="Pike">I
    can’t go any farther.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">The night will still be with us when we’ve
    rested.</q> Paddelack began unfastening the tent from his back. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">But you’re right, enough for now.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike tried to release the rope, but his hand stayed clenched around it,
    cramped or frozen or both. He was beginning to understand. Paddelack found
    a relatively quiet space between two large rocks that was sheltered from
    the wind, and pitched the tent. The tent, made of several layers of
    reinforced aluminized mylar, the same that Two-Bit Transportation used to
    ship liquid helium. It held heat well. Inside, Pike loosened his clothing,
    took off his boots, curled up into a corner, and fell asleep. Paddelack and
    Barbalan soon joined him.
  </p>

  <p>
    Indeed, when Pike awoke and cleared his eyes, the night had not left
    them. He knew by now, of course, that it would not leave them for more than
    another six months, maybe even seven, but the thought still made little
    sense to him. He tried to stretch his legs and found an almost paralyzed
    thigh. But as another pair of legs was lacking, these would have to do, and
    he set about exercising them. He broke open an unlabeled food packet and
    began munching on a crunchy wafer. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Tell me about the
    Gostum, Paddelack.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack yawned. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">All I know is that the Gostum
    were evicted from Triesk by a group led by a certain Lashgar. Evidently
    there was a split over where to set up the main base while waiting for the
    Polkraitz to return. Most of the Gostum, who originally seemed to have had
    some power over the Trieskans, were killed, but those that weren’t came
    south to Liddlefur, the other colony that had been set up down here. Which
    means they must have had shuttles of some kind. Anyway, the Liddlefurans
    who were here already didn’t seem to get along with the Gostum too well,
    either, so the Gostum moved over to Konndjlan, where they have been ever
    since. Up at Triesk? Who knows? I wonder if the place still exists. How
    would you like to face Patra-Bannk after a war when probably half your
    people are dead? Triesk probably died of exposure the first Patra—if not
    the first Bannk.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">And the Polkraitz themselves? The rulers, I take
    it. Who were they?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">I guess those originally in charge of the
    operation here. Rulers? I don’t know if that’s the best term. But they
    left, that’s for sure. The Gostum like to think the Polkraitz were on their
    side in the matter of where to maintain the base, but I don’t know if
    that’s true at all. Dates tend to blur when we look back, especially on
    Patra-Bannk, and I see no reason to view the Polkraitz and the Gostum as
    necessary contemporaries. Maybe they were, maybe they weren’t. The two
    factions at Triesk could have developed after the Polkraitz left. Trouble
    with Polkraitz theorizing is that there’s no evidence. You can make up any
    story you like and no one can disprove you.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Does she know who they were?</q> asked Pike, ignoring
    Paddelack’s admonition.
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack relayed the question. Barbalan shrugged. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Who cares? They seem to have brought us to
    Patra-Bannk a long time ago and are not here any longer. Does it really
    matter?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike twisted his face in annoyance. <q ab:speaker="Pike">It matters if we
    are to find out what that city means. It matters if the Gostum think we are
    Polkraitz—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Does it?</q> Barbalan asked.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">What do you mean?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">I don’t think you are Polkraitz, whatever the
    Golun-Patra and other prophecies foretell. May people must think you
    Polkraitz, perhaps not. Even Fara-Ny, who is wise with age, who knows? But
    I tell you this: above all, anyone who survives on Patra-Bannk must be
    practical, and the Gostum are more practical people than those of
    Liddlefur and Massarat. Your presence will be made the most of, that I can
    foretell. So what matters it if you are really Polkraitz?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Doesn’t anything matter to you?</q> Pike snapped. <q ab:speaker="Pike">You help us escape Konndjlan seemingly just for fun, in
    disregard for your own life, come back in even more disregard, sit quietly
    while we abandon you for a city, get lost for weeks and think nothing of
    it, and now you say your entire history is of no consequence. What matters
    to you, anyway?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Barbalan chuckled, almost giggled. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">What you say
    may indeed be true, but only because it is so nonessential. I sit at
    Konndjlan and see the mountains rearing up mightily over my head and the
    Great Desert extending to the horizon and no doubt far beyond. You show me
    a Polkraitz map which shows that Triesk is one hundred thousand kilometers
    north of here, and then take me across an ocean half again as far as
    that. Some of the older Gostum argue the world is flat, even though the
    younger think otherwise because of that same map and the secret of the
    Fairtalian; at least this I am told. Flat or round, the size of Patra-Bannk
    is to me inconceivable. What does one hundred thousand kilometers mean to
    me? I have a hard enough time feeling the distance to the ocean, which is
    only several hundred. And yet, in addition, I am told the Polkraitz built
    great cities, like the one we saw, and roamed the Universe like
    yourselves. All this makes me feel even more insignificant, that nothing I
    can do really makes any difference whatsoever.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">I’m afraid that all sounds very negative and
    fatalistic,</q> interjected Pike thoughtfully.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Not at all. That is what is essential. My
    insignificance gives me the freedom to do what I like, unencumbered by
    worries of consequences. Knowing I mean so little frees me from fear of
    death, as my death means no more than the death of an ant.</q> Barbalan
    paused now, almost out of breath. She didn’t think she had ever spoken so
    much at one time before. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">But I must admit that now
    I must stay alive and will have to be careful.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Why is that?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">I must get you two to Konndjlan.…</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">And?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Barbalan lowered her head and released her hair, dropping her hands to the
    ground between her crossed legs. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">That is all.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The climb continued. Pike counted five hours in his head, but his body
    counted a hundred. Neither estimate made any sense. The path grew steeper,
    until it was becoming a real climb and not a walk. Snow was piled in drifts
    here, alternately covering and unveiling the sharp edges of rock and flat
    gray faces.
  </p>

  <p>
    Suddenly Pike felt a tug on his rope and heard a shout near him. <q ab:speaker="Pike">The path is ended. Rocks and snow block it. We have to
    make our own path here.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    For a brief moment Pike thought that he was crazy trying to climb a
    mountain in the dark, in gale-force wind or greater, and in such biting
    cold. He tightened the hood around his face and made sure there was no
    exposed skin for the wind to make numb.
  </p>

  <p>
    A little while later, Paddelack scrambled to the top of a ledge with Pike’s
    help, sat down, collapsed in a heap, and grumbled aloud: <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Has it occurred to you that we might miss
    Konndjlan entirely? We could already be on top of it for all I know.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike leaned over and touched heads so that he could be heard without
    screaming his lungs out. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Have some faith, Paddy.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Faith in Lashgar? Certainly not in Sarek.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Faith in Barbalan and that she knows where she is
    going, I’d say.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Barbalan?</q> Paddelack looked around. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Where is she?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">A little ahead, I assumed.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack grabbed the rope that attached Pike to Barbalan and pulled. It
    came away slack. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">What the—</q> He pulled again
    until he reached the end of the rope, clip and all. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">It didn’t break—how could this stuff break?—it’s
    unfastened.</q> Paddelack scanned the rock wall with his lantern. Snow
    here, snow there. Just rock and snow. He rushed ahead, unthinking. More
    snow. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Barbalan! Can you hear me? Barbalan!</q>
    There was no answer except the shriek of the wind.
  </p>

  <p>
    He knelt at the snowbank and found a small hole from which he had pulled
    the rope. He began digging. Pike bent to his knees and flung the snow out
    behind him, only to have it blown back by the wind. The snow was soft,
    loosely packed. Could there have been a slide? Paddelack became frantic. He
    cupped his hands to his mouth and shouted: <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Barbalan, if you can hear me, try to move. Maybe the
    snow will shift and we will see where you are.</q> They dug for a telclad
    more and found nothing.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">I don’t think she is here,</q> Pike announced flatly
    as he sat back against the ledge.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Where else could she be? There might be a deep
    gulley here. She could have fallen in and then the snow piled on top of
    her.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">I don’t think it is that deep,</q> Pike shouted back
    over the howling wind. <q ab:speaker="Pike">I think she is gone. She was
    worried about what might happen to her at Konndjlan. Perhaps she just
    unfastened the rope and ran away, Paddy. That is conceivable, her cockeyed
    philosophy notwithstanding.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">A Gostum? Even with her philosophy, a Gostum
    afraid of death? Gostum are afraid of little, least of all dying.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">She did say she had to stay alive.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">I didn’t understand that at all.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike shrugged. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Look, she’s either dead or gone. You
    can’t have it both ways. And in either case, there is nothing we can do
    about it. I suggest we settle down for a few hours and see if she comes
    back.</q> Pike brushed the snow off himself, found a sheltered position
    under an overhang, and began unpacking the tent.
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack said nothing as he climbed in. He took off only his hood and fell
    into a fitful sleep.
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    When Pike awoke, his companion had evidently been long up. Pike took some
    food from his pack and ate in silence.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Doesn’t it even bother you that she’s gone?</q>
    Paddelack finally broke out, close to tears.
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike cleared his throat. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Of course. She was very
    helpful and I certainly appreciated her company. But she is gone now and I
    don’t see what we can do about it, except go on.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Go on? Go where? We don’t have the faintest idea
    of where we are going! We could climb forever and miss that fortress in the
    dark.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">We will go on and try to find Konndjlan.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">You can kill yourself for all I care, but I won’t
    let you kill me! This is a wild-goose chase.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">You know I’m doing this for your own good. This is the
    only way to get to what we seek: the metallic hydrogen, and the only way to
    get you off Patra-Bannk. But look, I’ll trade a bronze with you; first
    we’ll look for Barbalan again. If we don’t find her, we continue for…for
    one more day. If we don’t sight Konndjlan today, we turn back.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Today? Do you mean a Patra-Bannk day?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Don’t go nonlinear! Do you think I like putting up
    with your blatherings? Within the next six hours, or whatever the
    equivalent.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack began to tremble. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Long ago I forgot
    what an hour was.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Barbalan was dead or missing. That was an easy conclusion to reach, as
    there were no other possibilities. Paddelack became deadly silent and would
    not speak at all. Pike wandered about with his lamp, trying to find a way
    out of a dead end in which they had trapped themselves. He passed the beam
    over a rock wall and spotted a small chimney extending upward.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">I think there is a path less than ten meters above
    us,</q> he said, grabbing Paddelack. Pike wasn’t sure he believed it
    himself.
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike wedged himself in the chimney and began to shinny up with short
    thrusts of his legs. Paddelack followed, moving slowly. Pike bent to give
    him a hand as he emerged, struggling, from the top.
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike’s eyes met another rock wall, this one extending upward
    indefinitely. He heard himself sigh. The snow was piled high in places or
    blown away completely. The beam cut through the swirling white, seemed to
    bend itself in the terrific gale. Pike swung once and back again. The light
    caught a tall, cylindrical object and separated it out from the gorge
    wall. The guard turret. The road to Massarat. They were at the Konndjlan
    gate. Pike remembered his swift ride in the opposite direction several
    months earlier and smiled in a brief moment of nostalgia for adventures
    past.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">We were right underneath it all the time!</q>
    Paddelack exclaimed. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">I’ll bet Barbalan went on
    ahead.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike didn’t bet.
  </p>

  <p>
    Another swing of the light showed that the gate was open. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Curious that they should leave it open, wouldn’t you
    say?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Hmm,</q> Paddelack replied, <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">not so sure. They wouldn’t have been expecting
    invaders now—if they ever do; the drawbridge is open, anyway, probably to
    keep the weight of the snow off it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Perhaps you’re right.</q> Pike walked through the
    gate, untrusting eyes on the slab hanging above his head. The slab let him
    pass unharmed. No Gostum leaped out to attack him. The only sound was the
    whipping of the wind through the narrow gorge. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Now,
    how do we get across that gap?</q> he mumbled, already knowing the answer.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">The same way we did last time.</q> Paddelack
    unslung the rope from his shoulder.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Thanks.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">If Barbalan came this way,</q> Pike said once he
    was on the other side of the crevice, <q ab:speaker="Pike">then she walked
    very lightly—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">—or the wind blew away her footprints.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Believe what you like.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Within a moment they were at the lift. Even in the dark the cliff wall
    didn’t look as high as it did when the Gostum had descended with them. They
    went up, cranking away at the winch—obviously repaired in their
    absence. The lift jerked to a halt at their destination.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Well, here we are, do you believe it?</q> Pike turned
    to enter the tunnel was was confronted by a massive wooden door strapped
    with iron and impregnated with bolts. It was not a door to be broken. They
    searched for an opening mechanism. But if one existed, it was well hidden
    in the dark.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Should have expected this, I supposed,</q>
    Paddelack said as he sat down on the lift. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Can
    always blast it out if you’re anxious.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Not very elegant, I’d say.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">We haven’t been elegant in anything we’ve done so
    far; why worry about it now?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">One is elegant when the situation presents itself for
    an elegant solution.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">And how do you know when that occasion arises?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Take this situation, for instance. It seems to me that
    an elegant solution will present itself shortly, so I shall just wait for
    it to come to me.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack leans back against the wall. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Good
    luck,</q> he said dryly.
  </p>

  <p>
    Just then the door swung open in the middle and two armed Gostum, clothed
    in heavy parkas, appeared. Paddelack jumped up, his hand on his
    holster. Pike remained motionless.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Hold on,</q> he said, steadying Paddelack.
  </p>

  <p>
    The Gostum motioned the two men to enter and did nothing to harm them.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">How did you know?</q> Paddelack gasped.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">To quote an oft-repeated phrase by a well-known
    colleague: They’re Gostum, aren’t they?</q> Pike grinned under his hood. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Elegant enough for you? Try being a poet occasionally; it
    will do you good.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack remained thoughtfully silent and followed the Gostum into
    Konndjlan.
  </p>

  <p>
    The guards were silent as they led the Aliens through two more doors and
    finally up the moving floor.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">They really are concerned with security,</q> Pike
    remarked as they passed through a third door. He unzippered his hood.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">No, just insulation.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The stables were filled with hundreds of grask and the balcony above was
    lined with Gostum, all dressed heavily. Pike could see his breath expand
    into the cavern. The old leader called Fara-Ny shuffled forward, burdened
    by clothing as well as by age. The other Gostum parted as he walked down
    the ramp, and he brushed them aside with a long sweep of his hand. The
    young blond-haired Effrulyn was never far from his side, but his eyes were
    never near.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Fara-Ny">Let me admire your escape,</q> Fara-Ny said. <q ab:speaker="Fara-Ny">Such has rarely been accomplished.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike glanced at Paddelack.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">He says he liked our escape,</q> Paddelack told
    him.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">At least he has good taste.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Has Barbalan returned here?</q> Paddelack asked
    carefully.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Fara-Ny">No, she has not, and it is well for her that she
    has not,</q> Fara-Ny leaned on his walking staff, the two-meter-long rod
    that stood taller by an arm’s length than Fara-Ny himself.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Tell him that we have come to give consideration to
    the Triesk matter.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack translated.
  </p>

  <p>
    Fara-Ny did not change his expression; he stood there as if he had heard
    nothing. <q ab:speaker="Fara-Ny">We expected as much. Is he the
    Commander?</q> he asked Paddelack, pointing a long fingernail at Pike.
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack smirked. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Yes.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Fara-Ny">Good. Let us then adjourn to warmer quarters where
    the fires are burning and our breath is invisible.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack and Pike were taken to the same room in which they had been kept
    before. A great fire burned in the corner, funneling its suffocating smoke
    up a chimney to places unknown. Nonetheless, a small bird was caged near
    the fire to serve as an early warning for any troubles. Pike walked slowly
    to the pool and removed a soiled glove and dipped his hand into the
    blue-tinted water. It was heated.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Fara-Ny">Suitable clothes will be brought for you here,</q>
    Fara-Ny said, and left them alone.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">A splendid prison, didn’t I tell you?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Much better than the <em>Crimson</em> for the Patra,
    and I think we might enjoy it this time, if we don’t get
    claustrophobic.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Even better than Massarat, and I hope we know
    what we are getting into.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike stretched out on one of the large red cushions and sank down as to
    become almost invisible. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Look,</q> he said, voice
    rising out of the valley, <q ab:speaker="Pike">we want to get to
    Triesk. Staying here is better than staying on the <em>Crimson</em> or, as
    you said, Massarat. When the Patra is over, we’ll fly up there for a few
    days and find out whatever it is that they want us to find out.</q> Pike
    thought about the ships under Daryephna. Did that make sense? Yes, he
    thought it did. <q ab:speaker="Pike">There may be nothing there that can be
    useful to the Gostum, but it is worth the winter here to satisfy their
    curiosity.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack swirled the water in the pool and rubbed his legs with a coarse
    sponge. He spat out a mouthful of water. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">I’ve
    told you before not to underestimate the Gostum. I’m telling you that again
    right now. I don’t know what is at Triesk; I don’t know if anything is
    there at all. But I do know that the Gostum won’t stop looking for it until
    Triesk is a heap of ashes.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Don’t be nonsensical…</q> Pike said absently, and
    began to fall asleep.
  </p>

  <p>
    When he awoke he was surrounded by three male Gostum, including the
    mathematician. The blond-haired boy scowled when Pike winked an eye at him
    and motioned the others to put down their heavy burdens. Paddelack got up
    when two servants approached him, and he let them dress him. His attendant
    took a long tunic of gray off his right arm, placed it over Paddelack’s
    head, and tied it in front. The tunic was coarse and scratchy, and
    Paddelack hitched his shoulders in an attempt to remove the discomfort. The
    Gostum then unfolded a long blue robe, deep inky-blue edged with elaborate
    golden embroidery. The gold was tinged with red, flames that shot up into a
    late-evening sky. Paddelack was pleased as he slipped his arm into the
    loose sleeve. Slippers: wooden, soled hard, but with sewn-in socks and
    laced with leather. Paddelack wished he had a mirror in which to admire
    himself, until he saw Pike.
  </p>

  <p>
    An emerald-green robe hung heavily from his companion’s shoulders, trailing
    on the floor but not concealing the outline of his muscular body. The green
    became crisscrossed with gleaming metal as, with infinite care, a
    shimmering net was lowered over his neck. On his back was placed a grask
    hide, the strands of the rare black breed falling across his shoulders down
    to his forearm.
  </p>

  <p>
    The two men stared at each other with eyes wide open, not laughing, not
    believing, either. Effrulyn beckoned them toward the doorway. Paddelack
    took a step in that direction, but Effrulyn’s hand stayed him until Pike
    had passed.
  </p>

  <p>
    The passageway was lined with torches. A draft carried their sooty smoke
    with it. Below each torch stood a Gostum, each one silent, their faces
    craggy landscapes in the flickering orange.
  </p>

  <p>
    Effrulyn led them past the torches, through recently familiar corridors to
    the big council chamber. The line of Gostum stretched off behind them, each
    guard taking his place in the march as Pike and Paddelack strode by.
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike glanced at Paddelack for some information, but Paddelack only shook
    his head.
  </p>

  <p>
    They entered the hall and Pike once again noted the relief carved around
    the upper perimeter. Figures crouching at one end, a formless mass, growing
    more distinct and standing apart as the scene progressed along the
    wall. Always clusters of one, two…seven, Pike counted. Now Fara-Ny stood
    opposite him, beckoning with a gnarled finger, surrounded by cross-legged
    Gostum seated on the floor. Behind Fara-Ny two clocks were now raised. One
    Pike had seen before, short and squat, lying on a table; the other was new
    to him, tall and slender, marked by a slowly swinging pendulum. Effrulyn
    took his place next to Fara-Ny and dropped the Angles on their special
    stand. He bent down to them, head out of sight, and remained obscure until
    his nod was seen by Fara-Ny.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Fara-Ny">You will both stand here,</q> Fara-Ny said.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">And you will translate as well,</q> Paddelack
    heard the whisper in his ear.
  </p>

  <p>
    Softly at first, invisibly slowly, Pike heard the pulse begin. <em>Thump
    thump thump</em>, then again; three distinct pitches: low, high, down a
    little. <em>Thump thump thump</em>…Now a change: <em>thump</em> space
    <em>thump thump</em>, all the same pitch. Then both together, and the cycle
    repeated itself after an undetermined time. The torches continued to
    flicker undisturbed.
  </p>

  <p>
    Fara-Ny put out his hand toward the two men and began a chant, in curious
    asynchronism with the drums, in constant opposition to the
    <em>click-clack</em> of the great pendulum clock, all pounding in Pike’s
    head. Paddelack whispered after Fara-Ny, first out of rhythm, then catching
    up, then falling behind once more.
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike felt as if he were suspended in space and time, unable to move. A ruby
    ring was thrust upon his finger, scraping the skin. A golden bracelet,
    thick and heavy, was placed round one wrist. His throat was encircled by a
    dull gray necklace, bound with a stab of fire searing the neck. Into his
    right hand was thrust an iron spear, rusted, corroded with age. A helmet
    encrusted with jewels was placed on his head. And at the end, after
    uncounted ages, a black ring of uncut obsidian found its place on his
    forefinger, and the word <q>Commander</q> rang in his ears.
  </p>

  <nav><a href="twir_12.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_14.xhtml">Next »</a></nav></body></html>