<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:ab="http://example.org/audiobook-schema" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>The World is Round, Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="twir.css" />
  <link rel="icon" href="icon.svg" />
</head>
<body><nav><a href="twir_26.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_28.xhtml">Next »</a></nav><h2><div>Chapter Twenty-Six</div>A Gathering of
  Friends</h2>

  <p>
    The sledge left two narrow furrows in the dirt that trailed off until they
    disappeared, following a sharp bend in the beach. The footprints that
    marred the neatness of the furrows were deep, the marks of heavy treads and
    labored walking. At frequent intervals even those footprints were
    obliterated by the outline of fallen bodies. Ahead, the path was blocked by
    a rocky outcropping where the woods jutted out almost to the water. The
    woods were not those of Ta-tjenen. Pod-trees had not been seen for many
    teclads. The plants that grew here might be cousins of the bamboo, faster
    growing than any weed, towering in height and sometimes breadth, but
    underneath as transient as the Bannk. A single Patra would reduce them to
    hibernating spores.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer put down the branch that served as a handle for the sledge, looked
    at his red-blistered hands, and pressed them against the small of his weary
    back. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Let’s sit down in the shade,</q> he said as
    he contemplated how they were to cross the outcropping.
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen walked up to one of the trees and sunk her knife into it. Water
    gushed forth and she filled her flask from the stream. Carefully she tasted
    it before offering a drink to Stringer. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I hope this
    town is not far,</q> she said.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer found his map cassette and scanned the coast. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I can’t tell, exactly. Maybe another hundred
    kilometers, maybe more. But it’s the next town on the route and looks
    big. It is our only choice.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Baluf man">Hey, Stranger! Where are you heading?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer jumped up abruptly and vainly scanned the woods for the
    source of the voice.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Baluf man">Why are you passing through Baluf lands?</q>
    the voice shouted again. Stringer only half understood the words.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">He doesn’t sound very friendly,</q> Taljen said,
    voice modulating quickly.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer waved her silent and moved toward the sailplane. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">We are traveling south to the next town for
    help. There is a city nearby, isn’t there?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Baluf man">Are you friends of the Gostum?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer was taken aback. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">No,</q> he managed with
    a laugh.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Baluf man">Then why are you going to Pant? Only Gostum
    friends go there.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">We need help.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Baluf man">Your dialect is strange and your speech
    deformed. Where are you from?</q> A man wearing loose clothing emerged from
    the woods. The stubble of a beard covered his face. He was followed by two
    men and two women.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Would he believe me if I told him?</q> Stringer
    wondered. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Who wants to know?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Baluf man">We are asking the questions. You are in our
    territory.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Baluf man 2">Enough of this!</q> one of the other men
    exclaimed as he stepped forward holding a knife.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer ducked behind the fuselage of the sailplane and reached into the
    cockpit. He drew out his kalan. Absent for so long, it felt strange in his
    swollen hand. His adversary waited for him to stand up, then leaped from
    the ledge on which he had been standing, onto the dirty sand.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer sprang to life, using his last reserve of energy, and bounded over
    the plane. He caught his opponent’s arm with the tip of the blade. Blood
    trickled, but the other man did not stop moving. Stringer saw him raise his
    knife, preparing to hurl it underhand. Stringer fell backward and the knife
    flew over his head, lodging itself in the peeling paint of the glider’s
    fuselage. His enemy sprang, but Stringer managed to roll away and was on
    top of him in an instant, kalan ready to plunge into the base of the
    stranger’s neck.
  </p>

  <p>
    Suddenly he was surrounded by three others, knives drawn. His graser was
    still in the cockpit. Could he reach it? Taljen’s leap toward the leader
    gave him the instant he needed. The three strangers reacted together, the
    kalan dipped deep into its target before the victim could even stir, and,
    within a heartbeat, Stringer had the graser out. So, he still had some
    speed left.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Hold!</q> Stringer
    shouted. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Or I’ll kill you all before you move a
    centimeter.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Hold,</q> the leader said simultaneously to his
    followers. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Few men fight with a kalan too fast to
    be stopped. And Stringer is among them.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer dropped his gun in shock. The word <q>kalan</q> followed by his
    name were two rapid-fire impossibilities.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">’Tis been a long time, yuh, Stringer?</q> the
    leader said in Stringer’s old language.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Valyavar!</q> Stringer cried, peering into the
    other’s eyes, clasping the rock-hard shoulders. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You’re supposed to be dead!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">And I thought you to be gone, sure.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I didn’t even suspect—you’ve shaved! You really
    have a face! I didn’t see your hands; I can hardly see a meter, I’m so
    sick. Even your skin didn’t—I didn’t <em>recognize</em> you.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">You look terrible, if you don’t mind the
    observation. Looks as if Sarek did his best to finish you off. But you
    fight as always.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer shook his head as he took a long look at the body on the
    ground. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I was slow, out of practice, and almost
    dead. He nearly had me twice.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">My recognition was slow, too, too slow to stop
    you. I was so convinced you to be dead, I didn’t suspect it was a kalan I
    was seeing, even an Alien.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Sorry,</q> Stringer said as he kicked the red
    sand.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer and Valyavar together">And how did you get
    here?</q> they asked each other simultaneously.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer and Valyavar together">That’s a long story,</q>
    they answered in unison.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Best told over some food, yuh?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Yuh!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Then gather your things and I’ll take you to our
    home.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer collected the tent, his rodoft, and his few other supplies. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What about the sailplane?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">These two will take it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen was standing alone all this time with sunken shoulders and heaving
    breast. Her sun suit had another tear to add to the growing collection.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What’s wrong?</q> Stringer asked. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">We’re among friends.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    She pointed with her chin in the direction of the dead man and brushed back
    tangles of her hair with swollen fingers. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">You did
    that,</q> she said.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Yes,</q> Stringer replied. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">And what did you have in mind when you lunged at
    Valyavar here?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen stammered. Stringer turned away with Valyavar and walked off the
    beach with him.
  </p>

  <hr />

  <p>
    It was story-telling time around the campfire. Valyavar talked his own
    brand of what was the universal language of Patra-Bannk.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Those Gostum are a nasty crew, to be believed for
    sure. Do you remember the crash? When I pulled you from the wreck,
    unconscious, no sooner had I done so than we were beset by Gostum, black
    and orange devils. I killed one of them before I realized they wanted me
    alive. They must have thought you were more than dead and ran off with me,
    leaving you and that other rascal alone.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer turned to Taljen. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Why didn’t you tell me
    it was a Gostum I ate and not Valyavar?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I told you when you first asked that we ate a
    Gostum. Whether or not it was your friend, we couldn’t be expected to
    know. But you surely realized that finding you with the Gostum was one of
    the main reasons you were suspected of being Polkraitz.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer tried to remember the unfocused words of that first conversation
    but found that sounds without meaning were as ephemeral as sounds entirely
    unheard. He shook his head then. If there was any possible way of people’s
    misunderstanding each other, they would. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Go on,
    Valyavar.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">To me it seems I was blindfolded, and when I awoke
    I was at Pant. To be sure, I didn’t know it then. But I managed to get away
    from them when they were eating. So to truth, that’s it. I ran far and came
    across some natives around here in Baluf land who put me Under for the
    Patra. God, to be sure, didn’t show an interest, and I strike up another
    mark against him. But evidently my dress was appropriate. So I have been
    around here hunting what little is to be found and taking sturdy aim at the
    Gostum whenever they appear, no friends of mine, those. And now to cap it
    all, you run into me. I am amazed. What brought you to the middle of
    nowhere?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">A longer story than yours, from the sound of
    it. I’ll tell you the details later. But perhaps the meeting is less
    amazing than we think. We were heading this way to begin with, and since
    everybody seems to live near the coast—our route—assuming you were alive
    and us, too, our paths would have crossed somewhere.…So, now we are here in
    the middle of nowhere. Do we stay forever or fix a sailplane?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Before you decide,</q> Valyavar said, <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">let me continue. A few beclads ago, if my memory for
    timelines hasn’t flown from me completely, this girl, young enough to be a
    virgin, comes riding up from Pant alone, alone here in the Killer Bannk,
    the most reckless thing I ever set ears to.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Valyavar pointed to one of the two women who had been on the beach, now
    sitting around the fire. Stringer studied the girl. She seemed about his
    own age. Her shiny, waist-long black hair was braided and tied behind her
    head. Her skin, like that of all the natives this Bannk, was dark and
    lizardlike. A bolo was strapped around her slender waist and a knife hung
    across her chest opposite her water flask.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">She calls herself Barbalan,</q> Valyavar went on,
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">and said she was trying to find me. And that I
    must go south with her. Seems, it would be, that our friend Pike is down
    there and she knows where he’s about. I’m not sure I trust her. She talks
    about as much as you used to, Stringer.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer had not taken his eyes off Barbalan, and she met his gaze without
    flinching. She surprised him by speaking first.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">You must also come south with me. It is
    imperative. We must go to Pike and take him with us.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Why?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">We are all in great danger if we do not go south
    to Neberdjer. I am not sure why, exactly; I have only spoken to Neberdjer
    once and did not understand anything it told me. But I am sure this entire
    planet is in danger of being destroyed. Your help is needed.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Valyavar boomed: <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Is that to be believed? Do you
    trust her?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer put his hand on Valyavar’s knee to silence him. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Why are you doing this, Barbalan? Do you trust
    Neberdjer?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Yes. Why am I doing this? Pike, too, wanted me to
    explain my actions. How can one explain one’s self? I am the way I am. I am
    told that I do not speak much, that I act quickly, perhaps too
    quickly. Very well. I accept that. I do not consider myself and weigh
    myself as often as others do. I do not think it worth the time reflecting
    on myself; I am not worth it. I do what needs to be done.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer smiled. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Valyavar, is she a saint or a
    maniac? How will we get to Neberdjer, Barbalan?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">The way will be difficult. I left Konndjlan—where
    we must go—without orders and, even worse, assisting an escape. That is
    punishable by death. You see…I am Gostum.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Both Taljen and Valyavar sprang up. Valyavar grabbed his knife, but
    Barbalan was faster.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer held back the giant’s arm. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Now, don’t go
    nonlinear,</q> he said in the old language. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">She
    obviously means no harm. Go on, Barbalan. Talk slowly so I can understand
    you.</q> He noticed out of the corner of his eye that Taljen had left the
    campfire.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Shortly after Pike arrived in Konndjlan last
    Bannk, there arose a rumor in Konndjlan that another Alien had been
    captured in the north but had escaped at Pant. Later I helped Pike escape
    from Konndjlan, and soon I encountered Neberdjer at Daryephna. When Pike
    refused to go to Neberdjer, I thought I should find this other Alien. I
    returned Pike to Konndjlan and followed the pendant map to the stala in the
    desert. Normally that fifty kilometers would not have been difficult, but
    how I survived those winds I still do not know. With the information in the
    pendant it was easy to guess how to use the stala to get to Pant. I stayed
    there all last Patra, assuming that until this Bannk the Gostum at Pant
    would not know I was there without orders. I escaped near dawn, but that
    was teclads ago. Now that I have found you at last, the Bannk is more than
    half done, and the Gostum at Pant have certainly learned by now that I am a
    fugitive. My life is in danger both there and at Konndjlan.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">If you are recognized,</q> Stringer added.
  </p>

  <p>
    Valyavar glanced at Stringer. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">You’d be to risk
    it?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Yes.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Well,</q> Valyavar said, cocking his eyebrows, <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">what is it that you’re thinking?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Tell me, Barbalan, if what I say is true. Many
    people are going south to the place called Konndjlan for a great
    gathering. Rumors abound of the Polkraitz returning. The Gostum are taking
    anyone south who will go—and some who won’t. Villages we have recently
    passed are being deserted for whatever is happening. Why don’t we just go
    with them?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">It may work,</q> Valyavar agreed. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">I have noticed the migration myself. But there is one
    problem. Except for old friends who fail to recognize one another because
    thought dead, we clearly look Alien this Bannk, to even a blind man.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">That may help,</q> Barbalan said. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">It may be your safe passage.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Barbalan, how long would it take?</q> Stringer
    asked, remembering the Patra was not infinitely far away.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">From Pant? Ten telclads.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Ten telclads! And how far is Konndjlan? A walk
    over the next hill?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Beyond the World’s Edge, if there is one. From the
    old map it must be nearly fifty thousand kilometers.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">You are joking.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">No,</q> Barbalan replied.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer looked at <em>Nothing</em> strapped in pieces to the sledge. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">We spent more than half the Bannk flying here in that
    thing. Ten telclads to go as far as we’ve come already? I usually sleep
    longer than that.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Yes,</q> Barbalan repeated, <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">ten, as near as I can guess.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer puzzled over that as he began to stamp out the fire and gather up
    his things. Valyavar disappeared with his friends. The strangers returned,
    leading four grask. Barbalan threw a leather sack over one and mounted. In
    a moment Valyavar returned with his own sack, the same one he had always
    carried on Two-Bit, and a kalan strapped to his waist. He spent a few
    moments with a tall, dark, curly-haired girl. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">You’ll see me again,</q> he said, and kissed her.
  </p>

  <p>
    Not a second later he was mounted on the tallest grask. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Come on, Stringer! After your journey, the trip to
    Pant is not even a child’s punishment.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Well, <em>Nothing</em>,</q> Stringer said to the
    sailplane he had fashioned with his own hands, <q ab:speaker="Stringer">you’ve done better than I ever believed was
    possible. Maybe you will fly again sometime.</q> He patted the faded nose
    of the bird and turned away, only to bump into a bamboo tree. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I have better luck flying,</q> he grumbled, and grabbed
    the reins of the grask that was waiting for him.
  </p>

  <p>
    Before them, in a shallow valley covered with dull greens and browns, lay
    Pant, founded by the Gostum when the stala to that Elsewhere had opened
    up. Stringer led his grask out of the woods and sat down on the hill to
    rest. He glanced at the sun and winced. Was it seventy degrees? Was it
    eighty or ninety? All Stringer knew was that a pan of water didn’t boil
    sitting on the ground.
  </p>

  <p>
    Suddenly they were surrounded by Gostum. <q ab:speaker="Gostum guard">What
    business do you have in Pant?</q> asked one from atop his mount.
  </p>

  <p>
    Valyavar answered. <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">We have heard that you wish
    help in the south. We have come to help.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The Gostum smiled, teeth shining. <q ab:speaker="Gostum guard">Where are
    you from?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    All hesitated, except Taljen. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">From Ta-tjenen,</q>
    she said proudly.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">From Baluf land,</q> Valyavar said, pointing to
    the remaining three.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Gostum guard">Come with us.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    They were marched into the center of a town whose houses were largely open
    to the wind. Their escorts stopped at a hut. The Gostum who had spoken
    before stared a long time at Barbalan. Her hair had been hidden, her faced
    dirtied, her Gostum black exchanged for a loose white tunic. If the guard
    had known her once, recognition did not come now. He said, <q ab:speaker="Gostum guard">You will stay in this room until we are ready to
    take you south. Your weapons, please…They will be returned.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer and Valyavar unstrapped their kalans and handed them
    over. Barbalan unwound her bolo and unslung her knife.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Gostum guard">Leave your packs outside with this guard.</q>
    The guard sitting on the step seemed uninterested in anything but staying
    out of the way of the sun and the loose dirt that flew around them.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer pulled out his journal from the tent sack. The guard let him keep
    it. Barbalan and Valyavar put down their sacks and stepped over the guard
    into the hut. Stringer was about to follow when the leader took Taljen by
    the arm and told her, <q ab:speaker="Gostum guard">You will come with
    me.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What?</q> Stringer shouted.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Gostum guard">You said you were from Triesk, is that not
    true?</q> the guard asked Taljen.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I said I was from Ta-tjenen.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Gostum guard">That is what I thought. The ancient name. You
    will come with me.</q> To Stringer he said, <q ab:speaker="Gostum     guard">She must be held until further instructions are received to see if
    her travel is allowed. She will be questioned.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Taljen yanked her arm free but did not run.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I won’t let you!</q> Stringer shouted.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Stringer, what can you do?</q> Taljen asked. <q ab:speaker="Taljen">I will see you in the south, perhaps.</q> She followed
    the guard after leaving Stringer alone in the sun.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">No!</q> he called after her. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">We can’t risk—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Silence for now, Stringer,</q> Barbalan whispered
    in his ear as she caught his arm. She dragged him into the hut and shut the
    door behind them. The entire building shook and the hinges creaked with
    rust.
  </p>

  <p>
    The three sat facing each other in the middle of the stifling room. The
    floor, made of half-rotted planks, was green and purple with mold and
    sagged under their weight.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Wonderful,</q> Stringer sighed. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What now?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">I might have foreseen this,</q> Barbalan said. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Both Gostum and your friend Pike wanted to know of
    Triesk, and Taljen is from Triesk—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Taljen is from Ta-tjenen.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">I am afraid they are the same place,</q> Barbalan
    said, shaking her head sadly. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Taljen might have
    valuable information. I should have warned you.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer was rapping his knuckles rapidly on the floor. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What will they do to her?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">I don’t know.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">We gave them our weapons, like idiots—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Stringer, weapons won’t do us any good in the
    middle of Pant. But let me think a moment.</q> After a few minutes of
    silence Barbalan looked up. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Do we need Taljen
    south?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What do you mean? Leave her here? No, I can’t let
    you do that.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">No, you misunderstand. I mean, what good is
    rescuing her at Pant and taking her to Konndjlan to be recaptured?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer nodded at the reasoning. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Where can we
    take her?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Barbalan raised her thin eyebrows hopefully. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Triesk?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Can you?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">If it is possible to take her anywhere, we can
    take her to Triesk. But—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">—can we take her anywhere?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Barbalan once again lowered her head in thought. Stringer and Valyavar must
    be brought south at all costs. That was important. And she was still
    Gostum. Abruptly, she stood up and leaned out the window. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Guard, we’re hungry. Can I have that gray sack with
    food in it?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The guard ambled off the step and picked up the sack. Barbalan bit her lip
    and he opened it, but he saw only some freshly cut meat. He handed her the
    sack and sat down again. Barbalan tried closing all the windows, but most
    of the shutters, swollen from the damp, did not fit properly. She dumped
    the contents of the bag onto the floor. Her black Gostum uniform toppled
    out on top of the food. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Luckily we have a sleepy
    guard out there. I will report him myself if the chance comes. Now, perhaps
    I can be of use as a Gostum. Remember, I may not.</q> She talked as she
    began undressing. Stringer openly admired the sight of the slender beauty
    in her rugged Killer Bannk skin. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">My life may be
    wanted—it should be. If I am recognized, I will be killed. It is that
    simple.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">So what are you planning?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">To go and get Taljen. I will simply go and get
    her. You can even come.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">How?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">There are hundreds of Gostum at Pant. I stayed
    close to myself all Patra, so how many can know who I am? As long as we are
    not seen by someone who knows me, we are safe.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Won’t you be questioned?</q> Stringer asked,
    biting his lip.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">No one of lower rank will challenge this,</q> she
    said as she struggled to get the Fairtalian necklace over her head. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">We are again in luck that the previous owner was more
    well endowed than myself.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer smiled at this girl who could be so resigned to the constant
    danger and yet deal with it so calmly. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">What about
    higher rank?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Few and far between. The man outside certainly
    isn’t. Are the odds acceptable to you?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Yes. My mind is blocked; I can’t think of anything
    else to do. I’m glad you can.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Then I think it is usually better to do something
    than nothing. Let’s go.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">Indeed,</q> Valyavar laughed somberly, <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">she is a saint or a maniac.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Barbalan flung open the door. The guard jumped to his feet and whirled
    about, his short spear ready for action. His eyes came to rest on the
    necklace and slipped down to the pendant hanging across Barbalan’s
    breast. She did not wait for him to be startled. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">This is a secret mission. Give us our sacks and
    weapons.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The guard did as he was told without any hesitation.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Where is the other girl being kept?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Gostum guard 2">In the hut across the yard.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Come, Stringer.</q> She waved them out of the shed
    and onto the dirt yard, which was covered by a profusion of hoof
    prints. Stringer thought that short walk in the sun was the longest he had
    ever taken. As they approached the opposite side of the court and the
    waiting guard, Barbalan sucked in her breath, so far that her diaphragm
    moved visibly. Stringer knew what that meant and prayed for anonymity on
    Barbalan’s part.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">You’ll do nothing,</q> Barbalan said, as if
    anticipating Stringer’s planned action. She stepped ahead. Stringer still
    admired her courage but now wondered if hers was the only life in
    danger. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">I want the woman from Triesk to take
    south,</q> she said without a hint of nervousness.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Gostum guard 3">Are the others going also?</q> the guard
    asked, scanning Barbalan quickly and then dwelling on Stringer and
    Valyavar.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Yes.</q> Barbalan felt her heart beating and
    forced control.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Gostum guard 3">Fine,</q> came the response, and the guard
    ducked into the hut to bring forth a quiet Taljen.
  </p>

  <p>
    The four walked toward the center of town and the stala. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">I don’t understand,</q> Barbalan said. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">He should have recognized me, unless I am so
    radically changed in appearance.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Valyavar">I don’t suspect it’s God’s intervention—yet,</q>
    Valyavar chuckled.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">The problem ahead is not one to laugh at. Only the
    Fairtalian are allowed unblindfolded into the stala. You see those
    guards. They will be Fairtalian and will question me. Be prepared for a
    fight.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    This is crazy, Stringer thought.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Stringer, I will take Taljen to Triesk. Do you
    wish to come with me?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    At that remark, Stringer suddenly forgot that they were in immediate
    danger. He was now only conscious of the four of them standing along under
    the mid-bannk sun, the same deadly sun, high in the south, that had done
    its best to kill them and failed. Taljen, dirty, clothing torn, hair
    tangled, and hands blistered, remained undiminished, regal always, even
    next to the extraordinary Barbalan, who stood by her lithe and
    slender. Taljen had not spoken a word in the last few moments, hardly more
    during the last few beclads. What could be said now?
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Is it necessary that I go?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">I don’t think so. It will probably be safer for
    you if you arrived in Konndjlan without me.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer nodded. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">There is nothing for me in
    Ta-tjenen.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Then say your farewells now.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer walked up to Taljen, brushed her loose cowl aside, and kissed her
    lightly on her cracked lips. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Good-bye, Taljen,</q>
    he said simply.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Will I see you again, Stringer?</q> she asked in
    return.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I don’t know.</q> He pulled the battered journal
    from the tent sack and handed it to her. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">Give this
    to Alhane. It may amuse him.</q> Taljen took the book without looking at
    it. <q ab:speaker="Stringer">I wish I had something to give you.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Taljen">Good-bye, Stringer, Alien Nesta, good-bye.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Barbalan nudged them to the stala. It was a much larger building than any
    other in Pant. Stringer was sure it was metal, a giant cylinder with a
    spire on top. He wrinkled his nose, puzzled that such a thing should be
    found here.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Fairtalian guard">Halt!</q> shouted the Fairtalian guarding
    the stala. <q ab:speaker="Fairtalian guard">What business do you have
    here?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">To take these south to Konndjlan.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    The guards eyed them thoroughly, concentrating on Stringer and Valyavar. <q ab:speaker="Fairtalian guard 1">Do you intend to take them yourself?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Yes.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Fairtalian guard 1">Blindfold them.</q> One of the guards
    produced three blindfolds, which were then fastened around Taljen and the
    Aliens. The chief guard stepped aside, but only after he had taken their
    kalans and given them to Barbalan for her keeping. She smiled in thanks as
    she took her companions through the opening door. It shut behind them.
  </p>

  <p>
    Barbalan quickly glanced around and saw no one else present. She removed
    the blindfolds from her hostages and handed out the weapons.
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer had only a moment to regard his surroundings: the huge chamber
    room whose circumference was lined with doors and whose center was
    dominated by a huge cylindrical map. He had only a brief glimpse before
    Barbalan shoved him to an opening door. <q ab:speaker="Barbalan">Hurry! In
    you go before someone comes!</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Stringer hesitated, staring for a second at Taljen. Then he turned and
    entered the awaiting room. The door shut silently and Taljen, already
    turning away, was lost from view.
  </p>

  <nav><a href="twir_26.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_28.xhtml">Next »</a></nav></body></html>