<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:ab="http://example.org/audiobook-schema" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>The World is Round, Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="twir.css" />
  <link rel="icon" href="icon.svg" />
</head>
<body><nav><a href="twir_25.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown-top" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown-top&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_27.xhtml">Next »</a></nav><h2><div>Chapter Twenty-Five</div>Swept Away</h2>

  <p>
    Pike remembered the first time he had ridden through the great cleft at
    Massarat after the escape from Konndjlan. That seemed a long time ago now,
    even though it was only last Bannk. The sun then had been about as high as
    it was now. But then the Bannk was on its downward slope, and now it was
    still beginning. Pike’s shadow, atop his grask, was about the same length
    now as it had been then, but now the sun beat at his back instead of
    glaring in his eyes, and the shadow was cast in the opposite direction.
  </p>

  <p>
    Then the plateau had been deserted, all the people indoors or at the coast
    fishing for the Patra. Now the plain was covered with tents that rippled in
    the winds and people who wrinkled in the heat. Then his entry had gone all
    but unnoticed until Paddelack had spread the word; now the throngs lined
    the gorge to greet him. They sat on the outcroppings and waved. They stood
    upon rocks and cheered. The noise was deafening.
  </p>

  <p>
    A man ran up beside Pike and jogged along with him. <q ab:speaker="Massarat     man">You have come to help us?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike nodded and the man bowed low, returning to his place in the
    crowd. Pike smiled after him.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Massarat man 2">Will you take us out of the sun and the
    dark?</q> cried another.
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike opened his mouth, hesitating. What could he answer? <q ab:speaker="Pike">Yes, I will try to do that. You have my word.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Massarat man 2">Thank you, Polkraitz Master.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike opened his mouth again to speak and almost held out his arm to stop
    the figure. But he didn’t and resigned himself to the grask’s loping
    walk. He stopped at Karrxlyn’s tent, which was pitched with the others on
    the dusty plateau. Pike took a moment to view the ocean, so far away as to
    be virtually invisible but for the slight color change.
  </p>

  <p>
    Karrxlyn’s arm caught his shoulder before he had turned away from the
    sight, and together they went into the tent.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">I am glad to see you here. I was informed of your
    coming several beclads ago. I trust you have recovered.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">I hope so.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">I was beginning to wonder what happened to you and
    was contemplating sending an expedition to find you despite the Fear.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Yes, I met the source of the Fear, and it is well you
    stayed away. I was nearly killed.…So I see recruits have been arriving. You
    have told them the Polkraitz are Returned?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Karrxlyn cocked an eyebrow. <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">Haven’t they?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Humph. Well, I suppose they have. How many recruits
    are there? The plateau is filled with them—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">—and they are dying from the sun because the
    Liddlefurans will not come out of hiding. We have let them be, as you
    instructed. But we cannot wait forever.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Not forever, not any longer. Have the supplies I
    brought down from the ship been sent over?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">Yes. They are here.</q> Karrxlyn walked out of the
    tent and pointed to a small pile of bricks stacked on the ground.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Good. Let’s get some men.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Karrxlyn rounded up a handful of men, and Pike led them up the great stairs
    to the gate of Massarat. Pike himself directed the planting of the
    explosives at crucial points and armed them afterward.
  </p>

  <p>
    Back on the plateau, after the crowds had been cleared to the edge, far
    from the gorge, Pike turned to Karrxlyn. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Now we will
    show them what they have brought on themselves. They will learn to refuse
    our help.</q> He pressed the button on the detonator.
  </p>

  <p>
    The steps and the gate disappeared in a huge cloud of smoke and fire. Dust
    rose as the face of the gorge fell into itself. The roar was deafening,
    billowing upward and out like the explosion itself. The sky
    blackened. Karrxlyn fell to his feet, as did almost everyone present. When
    the rumbling had finally died away and the dust had settled, the fortress
    of Massarat was seen to be breached by giant, gaping holes.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Go get them out,</q> Pike said to Karrxlyn, pulling
    him to his feet.
  </p>

  <p>
    Karrxlyn ordered rope brought. The stairs were of little use now, and they
    had to climb in.
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike waited a telclad until Karrxlyn returned.
  </p>

  <p>
    There was a frown on the huge man’s face. <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">There is
    no one inside, Commander.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">No one! What do you mean, no one? Do you realize how
    many regulations I had to breach to bring those explosives? Do you think
    potential weapons are allowed in space without good reason? Are you telling
    me I wasted those precious bricks on a demonstration for no one?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Karrxlyn">There was one person there…</q> Karrxlyn stood
    aside, and Paddelack entered the tent.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Paddy!</q> Pike took his old friend’s dust-covered
    arm. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Come in. So you still want to get off
    Patra-Bannk, I see.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack said nothing.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Come on, now, let’s forget about what’s happened in
    the past. I’m willing to forget it if you are. Let’s trade a blooded bronze
    on it.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack smiled. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Pure and simple? All right.</q>
    He sat down in Karrxlyn’s oversized chair before Pike could offer it to
    him. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Have you found the metallic hydrogen
    factory?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike bit his lip. <q ab:speaker="Pike">Almost, I think.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">That’s a fine answer.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">I went to another city by the Fairtalian
    transportation system, which seems to be the same thing we saw at
    Daryephna, at least the map. I haven’t the faintest idea of how the thing
    works. You go in and about five hours later you come out and there you
    are. Somehow I knew I was supposed to go to Neberdjer. The directions stuck
    in my mind from that first encounter with the Fear. And then when I got to
    Neberdjer, it happened again. I must have been out for weeks—</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Don’t say weeks. How did you eat? How did you
    survive?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">There was food there. But, as I was saying, Neberdjer
    tried to kill me.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">You talked to the city?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Or something in the city, I’d say. It said it could
    take me to the metallic hydrogen facility. I suspect that was a lie,
    because it changed its mind.</q> Pike went on to explain what happened.
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Anything else?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">It was worried about a <q>stability control
    mechanism.</q> I can certainly say I don’t know what that is. I haven’t
    seen any stabilities that need controlling. Do you understand it?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack pulled his nose and squinted. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Stability
    control mechanism…stability control…Doesn’t seem to be referring to
    stabilities, does it? I should go there myself.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">You’d be crazy, pure and simple. I’ll tell you in more
    detail what happened there if you wish, but if you value your life, you
    will stay far away from that place. Not everyone on this planet is glad the
    Polkraitz are Returned.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">What do you mean?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">Neberdjer said we are Polkraitz.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack winced. He looked at Pike first in outright disbelief, then with
    more than a trace of doubt. He remembered Pike’s previous speculations: the
    Gostum claims, the Golun, the ships at Daryephna. The argument was tenuous,
    especially after this Neberdjer claimed it knew something about the
    metallic hydrogen. But then again, Neberdjer also said they were
    Polkraitz. Paddelack <em>had</em> always had difficulty in refuting Pike’s
    arguments, he realized. There was always that cloying possibility that Pike
    was correct. And now…Paddelack looked up from the ground to Pike’s face
    and, briefly, did see a Polkraitz Returned. Then he recovered. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Do you really believe it?</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    <q ab:speaker="Pike">I think the metallic hydrogen is a lie. There never
    was any more than we found. Our mission in that regard was a failure.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Paddelack jumped up. <q ab:speaker="Paddelack">Then let’s leave, let’s get
    out of here, go back to Two-Bit. You’ve caused enough trouble as it is.</q>
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike had risen and was now standing at the entrance to the tent, gazing out
    onto the plateau. Already repairs were beginning on the great steps as men
    and women carted away loose rock and began replacing it. They were singing
    as they worked in the rising sun of this Killer Bannk.
  </p>

  <p>
    Pike was spotted by the workers, and the cheers began to rise. He waved
    back slowly, smiled, and dropped his hand. <q ab:speaker="Pike">And do
    you,</q> he asked Paddelack, pointing to the scene, <q ab:speaker="Pike">believe in that?</q>
  </p>

  <nav><a href="twir_25.xhtml">« Prev</a> <select id="nav-dropdown-bottom" onchange="var e = document.getElementById(&quot;nav-dropdown-bottom&quot;); window.location.href = e.options[e.selectedIndex].value;"><option value="index.xhtml">Home</option><option value="twir_0.xhtml">The World is Round</option><option value="twir_1.xhtml">Prologue</option><option value="twir_2.xhtml">Chapter One: Signing On (In the Classical Style)</option><option value="twir_3.xhtml">Chapter Two: Casting Off</option><option value="twir_4.xhtml">Chapter Three: First Mistakes</option><option value="twir_5.xhtml">Chapter Four: Introductions for Planet and Explorer I</option><option value="twir_6.xhtml">Chapter Five: Introductions for Planet and Explorer II</option><option value="twir_7.xhtml">Chapter Six: A Propitious Arrival and a Hasty Retreat</option><option value="twir_8.xhtml">Chapter Seven: Death Row</option><option value="twir_9.xhtml">Chapter Eight: The Treasure Chest</option><option value="twir_10.xhtml">Chapter Nine: Dialogue on Two World Systems</option><option value="twir_11.xhtml">Chapter Ten: Conjectures and Refutations</option><option value="twir_12.xhtml">Chapter Eleven: Homecoming</option><option value="twir_13.xhtml">Chapter Twelve: And Back Again</option><option value="twir_14.xhtml">Chapter Thirteen: Turn Back the Clock: A Girl Alone</option><option value="twir_15.xhtml">Chapter Fourteen: Again Turn Back the Clock: The Night Begins</option><option value="twir_16.xhtml">Chapter Fifteen: A Brief Glimpse Underground</option><option value="twir_17.xhtml">Chapter Sixteen: The First Crack in the Sky</option><option value="twir_18.xhtml">Chapter Seventeen: Fire or Stars; Personalities vs. Universes</option><option value="twir_19.xhtml">Chapter Eighteen: Confronting the Past, Confronting the Present, Confronting the Future</option><option value="twir_20.xhtml">Chapter Nineteen: Trapped by a Planet and a Friend</option><option value="twir_21.xhtml">Chapter Twenty: Daybreak in the North: The Journey Begins</option><option value="twir_22.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-One: Daybreak in the South: Other Journeys Begin</option><option value="twir_23.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Two: The Road to Cathay</option><option value="twir_24.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Three: So Near and Yet So Far</option><option value="twir_25.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Four: Two Epiphanies</option><option value="twir_26.xhtml" selected="true">Chapter Twenty-Five: Swept Away</option><option value="twir_27.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Six: A Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_28.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Seven: Another Homecoming</option><option value="twir_29.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Second Gathering of Friends</option><option value="twir_30.xhtml">Chapter Twenty-Nine: To the Underworld</option><option value="twir_31.xhtml">Chapter Thirty: Two Problems</option><option value="twir_32.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-One: In the Realm of the Gods</option><option value="twir_33.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Two: Reculer Pour Mieux Sauter</option><option value="twir_34.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Three: Education</option><option value="twir_35.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Four: The Logic of Scientific Discovery</option><option value="twir_36.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Five: Dialogue Concerning a Third World System</option><option value="twir_37.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Six: The Great Siege</option><option value="twir_38.xhtml">Chapter Thirty-Seven: Final Convergence, or the New Cosmology</option><option value="twir_39.xhtml">Appendix: Days and Nights on Patra-Bannk (Revised 2020)</option><option value="twir_40.xhtml">A Note from the Technical Illustrator 2020</option><option value="twir_41.xhtml">Autobiographical Note 2020</option><option value="twir_42.xhtml">Back Cover</option></select> <a href="twir_27.xhtml">Next »</a></nav></body></html>